--- START PhysicalEducation-SQP-2025-26.pdf ---
 
 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION (048) 
Sample Question Paper   
Class XII (2025-26) 
TIME ALLOWED: 3 HRS                                                                                                 MAX MARKS: 70 
      GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS:  
1. The question paper consists of 5 sections and 37 Questions. 
2. Section A consists of question 1-18 carrying 1 mark each and is multiple choice questions. All 
questions are compulsory 
3. Sections B consist of questions 19-24 carrying 2 marks each and are very short answer types and 
should not exceed 60-90 words. Attempt any 5. 
4. Sections C consist of Question 25-30 carrying 3 marks each and are short answer types and should 
not exceed 100-150 words. Attempt any 5. 
5. Sections D consist of Question 31-33 carrying 4 marks each and are case studies. 
6. Section E consists of Question 34-37 carrying 5 marks each and are long answer types and should 
not exceed 200-300 words. Attempt any 3. 
 
 
Q No.  Marks 
 SECTION A  
Q1.   A tournament where every team plays with every other team once and the number of 
matches is  
determined with the help of the formula N(N-1) is called as:                                       
 
(a) knockout tournament   (b) double league tournament 
(c) single league tournament   (d) none of these 
 
[1] 
Q2.  Read the following statements labelled Assertion (A) and Reason (R). Choose one of the 
correct alternatives given below:             
   Assertion (A): Planning should be the first step for organizing a tournament.  
   Reason (R): A tournament can be conducted without planning. 
   In context of the above two statements, which one of the following is correct? 
(a) Both (A)and (R) are true and (R) is the correct explanation of (A). 
(b) Both (A)and (R) are true and (R) is not the correct explanation of (A). 
 
(c) (A) is true but (R)is false. 
(d) (A) is false but (R)is true. 
 
[1] 
Q3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Match the following:                                                                                               
 
Column I Column II 
(a) Garun asana  
(b) Horse riding 
(c) Rope skipping 
(d) Hal asana  
(i) Flat foot 
(ii) Lordosis  
(iii) Knock knees  
(iv) Bow legs  
(a) A-(iv), B-(iii), C-(i), D-(ii) 
(b) A-(ii), B-(iv), C-(i), D-(iii) 
(c) A-(iii), B-(i), C-(iii), D-(iv) 
[1] 
 
 
(d) A-(i), B-(ii), C-(iii), D-(iv) 
 
Q4. What is nutrition?                                                                                                          
 
(a) Essential substances of food like proteins, fats, carbohydrates, etc. 
(b) Consuming correct ratio of nutrients 
(c) Dynamic process in which consumed food is digested  
(d) Both (a) and (b)  
 
[1] 
Q5.    Identify the yoga asana below.                                                                                   
 
                      
 
(a) Uttana Mandukasana  
(b) Paschim tan asana  
(c) Dhanu asana   
(d) Hal asana 
 
[1] 
Q6.   Which of the following is a yoga pose for treatment of obesity?                               
 
(a) Gomulka asana          
(b) Bhujang asana 
(c) Paschim tan asana   
(d) Vajrayana 
 
[1] 
Q7.   Who are the participants in Special Olympics?                                                          
 
(a) Veterans     
(b) Children and adults with intellectual disabilities 
(c) Physically handicapped   
(d) Both (b) and (c)  
 
[1] 
Q8.   Female Athlete Triad does not include ________.                                                    
 (a) Amenorrhea         (b) Oligomenorrhea  
            (c) Osteoporosis         (d) Bulimia Nervosa  [1] 
Q9.  Find the odd one out.                                                                                                  
 
(a) Calcium    (b) Sulfur 
(c) Potassium    (d) Iron 
 
 
[1] 

 
 
Q10. What is the dimension of layout in Johnsen-Methney Test of Motor Educability?     
 
(a)15 × 3 feet   (b) 15 × 3 meters 
c) 15 × 2 feet   (d) 15 × 2 meters [1] 
Q11.   Which of the following is not a short-term effect of exercise on muscular system?    
(a) Accumulation of lactate      
(b) Increased blood supply 
(c) Muscular hypertrophy     
(d) Increased muscle temperature 
[1] 
Q12. Which of these is not a soft tissue injury?                                                                     
 
 (a) Abrasion                (b) Dislocation   
            (c) Strain                       (d) Incision 
          [1] 
 
Q13.   Which of the following helps with ice skating?                                                            
(a) Rolling friction                               (b) Sliding friction 
(c) Static friction                (d) Gliding friction 
 
[1] 
Q14.  Which of the following is NOT the factor effecting projectile trajectory?                 
 
(a) Gravity                    (b) Angle of release 
(c) Buoyant force   (d) Air resistance  [1] 
Q15. Self-talk refers to our ___________ consisting of statements we say to ourselves, either in 
our mind or out loud.                                                                                                      
 
 (a) Internal thoughts  (b) Internal behavior   
            (c) Internal soul  (d) Internal emotions  
[1] 
Q16.   Assertion (A): Aggression is part of human behavior and is necessary for an individual 
to live and struggle for higher achievements.                                                                 
  Reason (R): Aggression is inevitable and inseparable in sport activities. 
  In the context of the above two statements, which one of the following is correct?  
                 (a)  (A) is false, but (R) is true. 
(b) (A) is true, but (R) is false. 
(c) Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct explanation of (A). 
(d) Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation of (A). 
 
[1] 
Q17.   The method of training that involves repeated bouts of high-intensity work followed by 
periods of rest or low-intensity activity is known as _______.                                    
 
(a) Continuous Training   
(b) Interval Training 
(c) Fartlek Training       
(d) Circuit Training 
 
[1] 
 
 
Q18. Which of the following is not a type of coordinative ability?                                     
(a) Orientation Ability             (b) Acceleration Ability 
(c) Grouping Ability   (d) Dynamic Ability 
   
 
[1] 
 
Q19.   Differentiate between the three types of spinal deformity                                            [2] 
Q20.    What is a balanced diet? Mention its importance also. [1+1]                                                [2] 
 
Q21.  A male student performed the Harvard Step Test for 4 minutes. His pulse was recorded 
during the recovery periods as 58 beats in the first half-minute, 50 beats in the second, and 
42 beats in the third. Using the Harvard Step Test formula, calculate his Fitness Index and 
state whether his score falls in the Excellent, Good, or Average category. 
                                                                                                                        
[1½+½] 
[2] 
 
Q22.   Enlist any four types of fracture.                                                                     
 
½ * 4  
[2] 
Q23.   Write a short note on Sports Psychology.                                                                  
 
[2] 
Q24. A football player wants to improve his acceleration and quick reaction during a match. 
Suggest two suitable training methods and justify how each will help improve his 
performance.                                                                                                      
[1+1] 
[2] 
 
 
Q25.  League tournament is a better way to judge the best team of the tournament. Comment.   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
[3]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Q26. Discuss the exercise guidelines for different age groups.  [1+1+1]                              
[3] 
Q27.  Explain strategies to make Physical Activities Accessible for CWSN.                       [3]   
Q28.  Discuss the importance of pre, during and post competition diet in detail.  [1+1+1    
[3] 
Q29.  A gymnast maintains a handstand position on the balance beam, then performs a flip. 
Differentiate between the types of equilibrium shown and explain how they help in 
performance.                                                                                                     
  
[1+2]    
[3] 
Q30.   Describe personality. Explain dimensions of personality.                             [1+2]    
[3] 
 
Q31.   Read the following text carefully and answer the questions that follow:                
Competing in physical activities has been the natural tendency of humans. The 
competitions or tournaments are held according to the set rules and regulations. The 
success of the tournament depends upon suitable fixture 
 
[4] 
 
 
 
 
  1. The method followed in drawing the fixture is: 
a) Random method 
b) Knock out method 
c) League cum knockout method 
d) League method 
  2. The number of matches played can be calculated by the formula _____. 
a) 2N 
b) N+1 
c) N/2 
d) N - 1 
  3. What is the advantage of this tournament?  
                    a) More matches are played 
b) Less number of teams participate 
c) The knockout tournament takes less time and is economical 
d) All teams play equal number of matches 
  4. What is the term used if privilege is given to a team to play at a higher round?  
                    a) Bye 
b) Draw 
c) Super seeding 
d)  Any of the above 
 
Q32.   Based on the picture given below, answer the following questions.                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Identify the logo. 
(a) Special Olympics  
(b) Paralympics 
(c) Deaflympics  
(d) Special Olympics Bharat 
2. What does the circle signify?  
[4] 

 
 
 (a) Unity  (b) Ears 
 (c) Strength  (d) Iris 
3. In which year was it held for the first time? 
           (a)  2001          (b) 1924            (c) 1948               (d) 1968 
4. What are the four colours in the logo?  
 (a) Red, Yellow, Black, Blue 
  (b) Red, Blue, Green, Yellow 
 (c) Yellow, Black, Red, Green  
            (d) Brown, Blue, Green, Red 
 
Q33.  In relation to the pictures, answer the following questions:                                  
   
 
1. When the two ends of the injured bone enter into each other it is said to be. 
 (a) Comminuted Fracture (b) Greenstick Fracture 
 (c) Impacted Fracture             (d) Transverse Fracture 
 
2. ___________ is a comminuted fracture. 
 (a) (d)               (b) (b)  
 (c) (e)                (d) (a)  
 
3. When the bone is broken into many pieces at one place or different places, it is 
called. 
(a) Oblique Fracture 
(b) Impacted Fracture 
(c) Comminuted Fracture 
(d) Greenstick Fracture 
4. __________ fracture occurs in a straight line at a right angle to the shaft of the bone. 
Usually caused by a direct blow 
(a) Greenstick Fracture 
(b) Oblique Fracture 
(c) Transverse Fracture 
(d) Impacted Fracture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Question for Visually Impaired)  
 
Vitamins and minerals are essential nutrients which protect us from various diseases and 
are helpful for general development of the body. 
 
1. __________ is a group of 8 water-soluble vitamins which are important for 
cellular metabolism.: 
         [4] 
 

 
 
a) Vitamin A    
b) Vitamin K 
c) Vitamin B     
d) Vitamin D 
 
2. _________ disease is caused due to lack of Vitamin B. 
a) Anemia 
b) Kwashiorkor 
c) Scurvy 
d) Beri Beri 
 
3. Vitamin______ is important for healthy bones and teeth. 
a) K 
b) A 
c) D 
d) C 
 
4. Vitamin_____ is needed for blood clotting 
a) A 
b) D 
c) K 
d) E 
 
 
Q34.  What do you mean by Asthma. Mention its symptoms. Explain the procedure, benefits 
and contraindications of an asana beneficial for the patient of arthritis.  
[1+2+2] 
[5] 
 
Q35. Make a table of test items listed under fitness test by SAI (Age group 9-18 yrs) Explain 
the Procedure and Scoring of 50 MTS Run and Partial Curl Up 
[1+2+2]                       
[5] 
Q36.  What do you understand by circuit training? How will a coach plan circuit training 
sessions with 6 stations to develop the fitness of his new trainees? Explain.  
         [1+4]  
[5] 
 
Q37.    What is a lever? Discuss the application of Lever in sports.  [2+3]                        
[5] 
 
 

--- END PhysicalEducation-SQP-2025-26.pdf ---
--- START PhysicalEducation-MS-2025-26.pdf ---
 
 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION (048) 
Class XII (2025-26) 
Marking Scheme 
 
TIME ALLOWED: 3 HRS                                                                                                 MAX MARKS: 70 
 
 
Q No. Answer Marks 
 SECTION A  
Q1. B. Double league tournament 1 
Q2. C. A is true, R is false 1 
   Q3. A. A-(iv), B-(iii), C-(i), D-(ii) 1 
Q4.  C.  Dynamic process in which consumed food is digested 1 
    Q5.   C. Dhanur asana  1 
Q6.  C. Paschimottanasana 1 
Q7.  B. Children and adults with intellectual disabilities 1 
Q8.  B. Oligomenorrhea 1 
Q9.   D. Iron 1 
Q10.  C. 15 × 2 feet 1 
Q11. C. Muscular hypertrophy 1 
Q12. B. Dislocation 1 
Q13. B. Sliding fiction 1 
Q14. C. Buoyant force 1 
Q15. A. Internal thoughts 1 
Q16. D. Both (A) and (R) are true but R is not the correct explanation of (A). 1 
Q17. B. Interval Training 1 
Q18. A. Orientation ability 1 
 SECTION B  
Q19. Differentiate between the three types of spinal deformity. 
Kyphosis 
● Outward curvature of the thoracic spine (hunchback appearance) 
● Head and shoulders lean forward 
● Common in older adults or due to poor posture 
● Can cause breathing issues and back pain in severe cases 
 
Lordosis 
● Excessive inward curvature of the lumbar spine (swayback) 
● Abdomen and buttocks protrude outward 
● Often caused by weak abdominal muscles or obesity 
● May lead to lower back discomfort and postural imbalance 
 
Scoliosis 
● Lateral (sideways) curvature of the spine in ‘S’ or ‘C’ shape 
● Uneven shoulders or hips may be visible 
● Can be congenital or develop during adolescence 
● Severe cases may affect lung and heart function 
(any two) 
[1+1] 
Q20.    What is balanced diet? Mention its importance  
Balanced Diet – Definition [1] 
● Contains all essential nutrients in correct proportion. 
[2] 
 
 
 
Importance of Balanced Diet (Any 2-3 points): 
● Provides energy 
● Supports growth and repay 
● Boosts immunity 
● Prevents deficiencies and diseases 
● Maintains body functions efficiently 
 
Q21. A male student performed the Harvard Step Test for 4 minutes. His pulse was recorded 
during the recovery periods as 58 beats in the first half-minute, 50 beats in the second, 
and 42 beats in the third. Using the Harvard Step Test formula, calculate his Fit ness 
Index and state whether his score falls in the Excellent, Good, or Average category 
 
Formula: 
Fitness Index = (Duration of exercise in seconds × 100) ÷ (2 × Sum of pulse 
counts in recovery) 
 
Step 1: 
Duration = 4 minutes = 240 seconds 
Sum of pulse = 58 + 50 + 42 = 150 beats 
 
Step 2: 
Fitness Index = (240 × 100) ÷ (2 × 150) = 24000/300 = 80 
 
Category - Good 
[2] 
Q22.   Enlist any four types of fracture.  
i. Simple Fracture 
ii. Compound Fracture 
iii. Comminuted Fracture 
iv. Greenstick Fracture 
v. Transverse Fracture 
vi. Oblique Fracture 
vii. Impacted Fracture 
(any four) 
 
[1/2*4] 
Q23. Write a short note on Self Talk.  
Sports psychology is  a field that studies how psychological factors influence 
athletic performance and participation in sports, exercise, and physical 
activity. It examines the mental aspects of sports, including motivation, anxiety, 
stress, and the impact of sports on well-being.  
Key Areas of Focus: 
• Performance Enhancement: 
Sports psychologists help athletes improve their performance by using 
psychological techniques like goal setting, visualization, relaxation, and self -
talk.  
• Mental Health and Well-being: 
They also address the impact of sports on an individual's mental health, 
including issues like burnout, anxiety, and depression.  
• Team Dynamics: 
Sports psychology can also help improve team dynamics and communication, 
fostering a more positive and collaborative environment.  
• Coaching and Training: 
They work with coaches to understand how to create effective training programs 
that incorporate psychological principles.  
[1/2*4] 
 
 
• Social and Developmental Aspects: 
Sports psychologists study how sports participation affects an individual's 
social development and overall well-being.  
( any four) 
 
Q24. A football player wants to improve his acceleration and quick reaction during a match. 
Suggest two suitable training methods and justify how each will help improve his 
performance.  
1. Acceleration Sprints – Improve the player's ability to quickly reach top speed 
during sudden movements in a match. 
 
2. Reaction Drills – Enhance response time to game situations like passes or 
opponent movements. 
[1+1] 
 SECTION C  
Q25.  League tournament is a better way to judge the best team of the tournament. 
Comment.  
● Equal opportunities to all the teams  
● League matches minimize impact of luck or unexpected outcomes 
● Judged on basis of multiple matches  
● Ranking of basis of points earned  
● Less pressure on teams with compassion to knockout tournament  
● Scope of improvement   
[3] 
Q26. Discuss the exercise guidelines for different age groups.  
Children (Under 5 years): 
o At least 180 minutes/day of physical activity. 
o Tummy time (30 mins) for infants who aren’t mobile. 
o Avoid being restrained for over 1 hour at a time. 
o Limit or avoid screen time, depending on age. 
 
Adolescents (5–17 years) 
o Minimum 60 minutes/day of moderate to vigorous activity. 
o Include muscle and bone-strengthening exercises 3 days/week. 
o Prefer aerobic activities like running, swimming, cycling. 
o Limit screen time and reduce sedentary behavior. 
 
Senior Citizens (65+ years): 
o 150–300 minutes/week of moderate aerobic activity. 
o Do balance and strength exercises 2–3 days/week. 
o Be physically active daily; avoid long sitting hours. 
o Adapt intensity as per health conditions and ability. 
[1+1+1] 
Q27. Explain strategies to make Physical Activities Accessible for CWSN.  
 
Strategies to Make Physical Activities Accessible for CWSN: 
1. Sensory Integration – Reduce loud music, use natural lighting, and provide 
headphones/sunglasses. 
[3] 
 
 
2. Positive Behaviour Support (PBIS) – Use picture schedules and encourage 
positive interactions. 
3. Team Building Activities – Focus on creative, cooperative games over 
competition. 
4. Accessible Surfaces – Use gym mats or level fields to support mobility and 
wheelchair use. 
5. Inclusive Classrooms – Educate CWSN alongside others to promote 
acceptance. 
6. Assistive Technology – Use tools like large balls, bells, or string-attached 
equipment. 
7. Adaptive Physical Education – Modify rules and games based on individual 
needs. 
8. Creative Game Focus – Use imaginative games to build confidence and 
reduce pressure. 
(4 points) 
Q28.  Discuss the importance of pre, during and post competition diet in detail.  
 
Pre-Competition Diet 
o Provides energy, prevents early fatigue, and ensures smooth digestion 
before performance. 
o Consume high-carbohydrate foods like rice, pasta, or bread for 
sustained energy. 
o Prefer easily digestible, low-fat, and non-fried meals taken 3–4 hours 
before the event. 
 
During Competition Diet 
o Maintains hydration, energy, and electrolyte balance to avoid fatigue 
and muscle cramps. 
o Sip on glucose-rich drinks or electrolyte solutions to maintain blood 
sugar and sodium levels. 
o Include small portions of quick energy foods like banana or energy 
gels if needed. 
 
Post-Competition Diet 
o Supports recovery by replenishing lost fluids and restoring glycogen 
levels in muscles. 
o Eat carbohydrate-rich foods such as fruits, sandwiches, or energy bars 
immediately after. 
o Rehydrate with fluids like water, juice, or sports drinks to replace lost 
electrolytes.  
 
[1+1+1] 
Q29.  A gymnast maintains a handstand position on the balance beam, then performs a flip. 
Differentiate between the types of equilibrium shown and explain how they help in 
performance.  
      a) Static equilibrium –  
● Shown during handstand; 
● Body is balanced and at rest. 
 
b) Dynamic equilibrium –  
● Shown during flip;  
● Stability maintained while in motion. 
 
 
o Helps maintain balance, control, and fluidity during transitions and 
performance. 
[2+1] 
 
 
Q30.   Describe personality. Explain dimensions of personality. 
 
>Personality is the combination of physical, mental, psychological, and 
emotional traits that make an individual unique. 
 
1. Physical Dimension 
 
o Height and weight 
o Body structure and posture 
o Facial appearance and complexion 
 
2. Mental Dimension 
o Intellect and reasoning ability 
o Decision-making power 
o Memory and concentration 
 
3. Psychological Dimension 
o Emotions and mood stability 
o Self-confidence and motivation 
o Willpower and attitude 
[3] 
Q31. 1. b) Knockout method  
2. d) N - 1 
3. c) Knockout tournament takes less time and is economical 
4. a)  Bye 
 
[1*4=4] 
Q32. 1. (c) Deaflympics  
2. (d) Iris 
3.  (b) 1924 
4. (b) Red, Blue, Green, Yellow    
       
[1*4=4] 
Q33. 1. (c) Impacted Fracture  
2. (b) (b)  
3. (c) Comminuted Fracture 
4. (c)  Transverse Fracture 
 
(FOR VISUALLY IMPAIRED) 
1. b) Vitamin B 
2. d) Beri Beri 
3. c) D 
4. c) K 
 
[1*4=4] 
Q34. What do you mean by Asthma. Mention its symptoms. Explain the procedure, 
benefits and contraindications of an asana beneficial for the patient of asthma.  
 
Asthma is a chronic respiratory condition where the airways become inflamed 
and narrow, leading to difficulty in breathing. It often triggers coughing, 
wheezing, shortness of breath, and chest tightness. 
 
Symptoms of Asthma: 
● Difficulty in breathing 
● Wheezing (whistling sound while breathing) 
● Tightness in chest 
● Frequent coughing, especially at night or early morning 
[1+2+2] 
 
 
● Fatigue during physical activity 
 
Mats asana (Fish Pose) 
 
Procedure 
1. Lie flat on your back with legs extended and hands beside the thighs. 
2. Place the hands underneath the hips with palms facing down. 
3. Lift the chest upward while arching the back and tilt the head backward so 
that the crown touches the floor. 
4. Hold the posture while breathing deeply and slowly. 
5. Return to the starting position gently. 
 
Benefits: 
❖ Expands the chest and improves lung capacity. 
❖ Helps ease respiratory issues like asthma and bronchitis. 
❖ Stimulates the throat and opens nasal passages for easier breathing. 
❖ Strengthens the upper back and neck muscles. 
❖ Reduces anxiety and stress, which can trigger asthma. 
 
Contraindications: 
❖ Avoid in case of serious neck or back injury. 
❖ Not suitable for individuals with high blood pressure or migraines. 
❖ Should be performed under guidance if suffering from spinal disorder. 
 
Q35.  Make a table of test items listed under fitness test by SAI (Age group 9-18 yrs) 
Explain the Procedure and Scoring of 50 MTS Run and Partial Curl Up.   
 
AGE GROUP: 9-18+ YEARS | CLASS 4 to 12 For 
 
1. Body Composition (BMI) 
 
2. Strength 
a. Abdominal (Partial Curl-up)  
b. Muscular Endurance (Push Ups for Boys, Modified Push Ups for Girls) 
 
3. Flexibility (Sit and Reach Test) 
 
4. Cardiovascular Endurance (600 Meter Run/Walk) 
 
5. Speed (50 mt. Dash) 
 
50 MTR DASH (STANDING START) 
Procedure: A thorough warm up should be given, including some practice 
starts and accelerations. Start from a stationary position, with one foot in front 
of the other. The front foot must be on or behind the starting line. This starting 
position should be static (dead start). The tester should provide hints for 
maximizing speed (such as keeping low, driving hard with the arms and legs) 
and encouraged to continue running hard through the finish line. 
Scoring: Time taken for completion 
 
 
[2.5+2.5] 
 
 
 
 
 
ABDOMINAL (PARTIAL CURL-UP) 
Procedure: The subject lies on a cushioned, flat, clean surface with knees 
flexed, usually at 90 degrees, with hands straight on the sides (palms facing 
downwards) closer to the ground, parallel to the body. The subject raises the 
trunk in a smooth motion, keeping the arms in position, curling up the desired 
amount (at least 6 inches above/along the ground towards the parallel strip). 
The trunk is lowered back to the floor so that the shoulder blades or upper 
back touch the floor. 
 
Scoring: Record the maximum number of Curl ups in a certain time period (30 
seconds). 
 
   
Q36.  What do you understand by circuit training? How a coach will plan circuit training 
sessions with 6 stations to develop fitness of his new trainees? Explain 
 
1. A training method where different exercises are performed in a 
sequence (stations) with minimal rest. 
2. Each station targets a specific fitness component or muscle group. 
3. Helps improve overall fitness efficiently in limited time. 
 
 
6 Sample Stations (Exercises): 
 
● 1. Push-ups 
● 2. Squats 
● 3. Skipping 
● 4. Sit-ups 
● 5. Shuttle runs 
● 6. Plank hold 
(Or any other suitable)  
 
Components to be Developed in New Trainees: 
 
● Strength 
● Endurance 
● Flexibility 
● Speed 
● Agility 
● Coordination 
(Explanation of each point along with a circuit) 
 
[1+4] 
Q37.    What is a lever? Explain the types of levers with the help of example.  
A Lever is a simple machine that provides mechanical advantage to magnify 
the force necessary to overcome a resistance. 
There are three types of levers 
● Class 1 lever (see saw/ seated dumbbell triceps) 
● Class 2 lever (pushing against the block in sprint start/ calf raises) 
● Class 3 lever (fishing rod/ leg extensions) 
(each type to be explain with help of examples)  
[1+3+1] 

--- END PhysicalEducation-MS-2025-26.pdf ---
--- START PhysicalEducation-SQP-2024-25.pdf ---
1 
 
  PHYSICAL EDUCATION (048) 
Sample Paper  
Class XII (2024-25) 
TIME ALLOWED: 3 HRS                                                       MAX. MARKS: 70 
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS: 
  
1)      The question paper consists of 5 sections and 37 Questions. 
2)      Section A consists of question 1-18 carrying 1 mark each and is multiple choice   
          questions. All questions are compulsory. 
3)      Sections B consist of questions 19-24 carrying 2 marks each and are very short   
         answer types and should not exceed 60-90 words. Attempt any 5. 
4)      Sections C consist of Question 25-30 carrying 3 marks each and are short answer  
          types and should not exceed 100-150 words. Attempt any 5. 
5)      Sections D consist of Question 31-33 carrying 4 marks each and are case studies.  
          There is internal choice available. 
6)      Section E consists of Question 34-37 carrying 5 marks each and are short answer  
         types and should not exceed 200-300 words. Attempt any 3. 
 
(SECTION -A) 
 
Q1. How many total matches will be played in a knock out fixture of 19 teams          1 
A. 18   B. 17   C. 20   D. 16 
 
Q2. Given below are the two statements labeled Assertion (A) and Reason (R). Read               1 
        the statements and choose the appropriate option from the options given below: 
Assertion: The knock out tournament is an elimination tournament 
Reason: In knock out tournament, winner of each match advances in the tournament and 
the loser gets eliminated. 
In the context of the above two statements, which one of the following is correct? 
A. Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct explanation of (A). 
B.  Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation of (A). 
C.  (A) is true, but (R) is false. 
D.  (A) is false, but (R) is true 
 
 
Q3. Match the following:                 1 
List I List II 
I Knock Knee 1 Increase exaggeration of backward curve 
II Kyphosis 2 Wide gap between the knees when standing with feet together 
III Lordosis 3 Knees touch each other in normal standing position 
IV Bow legs 4 Inward curvature of the spine 
 
A. I-3,  II-1,  III-4,  IV-2 
B. I-1,  II-3,  III-4,  IV-2 
C. I-4,  II-2,  III-1,  IV-3 
D. I-2,  II-3,  III-4,  IV-1 
2 
 
 
 
 
Q4. For developing muscles, which nutrient should be increase in diet 
A. Vitamins     C. Minerals 
B. Protein      D. Carbohydrates 
 
Q5. Identify the asana:              1 
                           
                 
A.      Paschimottanasana 
B.     Halasana 
C.     Vajrasana 
D.      Dhanurasana 
 
Q6. Which asana is pose like cobra?            1 
A. Bhujangasana  
B. Dhanurasana 
C. Vajrasana  
D. Ardhmatsyendrasana 
 
Q7. Deaflympics Games was first organized in the year…………      1 
A. 1896  B. 1960  C. 1924  D. 1951 
 
Q8. Menarche is defined as the:       1 
A. Ending of menstrual period of women 
B. Beginning of menstrual period in women 
C. Time of pregnancy 
D. Missing of menstrual cycle 
 
Q9. Which of the following are fat soluble vitamins     1 
A. Vitamin d & k 
B. Vitamin b & c 
C. Vitamin a & e 
D. Both option a & c 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
Q10. Match the following:         1 
I Plate Tapping Test 1. Upper body strength boys 
II Push up 2. Reaction time 
III Partial Curl up 3. Upper body strength girls 
IV Modified pushup 4. Abdominal strength 
 
 
A. I-2, II-1, III-4, IV-3 
B. I-2, II-3, III-1, IV-4 
C. I-1, II-3, III-2, IV-4 
D. I-2, II-3, III-4, IV-1 
 
Q11. Which of the following is a physiological factor determining flexibility?               1 
A. Bone density 
B. Joint structure 
C. Cardiac output 
D. Tidal Volume  
 
Q12. The ability to tolerate higher concentration of ……………. Can help in improving 1 
 endurance performance.  
A. Lactic acid     C. acetic acid   
B. Hydrochloric acid    D. Sulphuric acid 
 
Q13.  If a ball is hit and it is stop by gravitational force, this is an example of which    1 
law of Motion. 
A. Law of Inertia 
B. Law of acceleration  
C. Law of action and reaction 
D. Both a & b 
 
Q14. In which of the following sport friction plays the least important role.  1 
A. Car race 
B. Football 
C. Ice skating 
D. Hockey 
 
Q15.  Instrumental aggression is related to       1 
A. Accepting defeat 
B. Achieving goal  
C. Only performance 
D.  Hurting someone to gain something 
 
Q16. Given below are the two statements labeled Assertion (A) and Reason (R).    1 
    Assertion: Aggression is part of human behavior and is necessary for an individual to   
                     live and struggle for higher achievements 
    Reason: Aggression is inevitable and inseparable in sport activities 
In the context of the above two statements, which one of the following is correct? 
A.   Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct explanation of (A). 
4 
 
B.   Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation of (A). 
C. (A) is true, but (R) is false. 
D. (A) is false, but (R) is true 
 
Q17.  Which of these is a type of endurance?     1 
A. Static      C. Dynamic 
B. Specific     D. Relative 
 
Q18. Which type of coordinative ability is required in game like judo and wrestling   1 
B. Orientation ability 
C. Coupling ability 
D. Adaptation ability 
E. Differentiation ability 
(SECTION B- Attempt any 5) 
 
Q19. Enlist any two-exercise guideline by WHO for different age groups.     2 
Q20. How we can say that protein is an essential component of diet?                         2 
Q21. Mention the test performed on 9 to 18 yrs. of age group in SAI Khelo  
India fitness test and explain any one?     1+1 
Q22. List down the types of bone injuries    .                      2 
Q23. What do you understand by the term goal setting                                      2 
Q24. Define Flexibility and list down its type.                                        1+1 
    (SECTION C- Attempt any 5) 
  
Q25. Specify the purpose of specific sports programme organised for community services.   3 
Q26. What are the health problem face by a woman due to female athlete triad in its sports and 
athletic performance.                        3 
Q27. Write in detail the aims and objectives of special Olympic Bharat.       3                 
Q28. Differentiate between nutritive and nonnutritive components of a diet on the basis of their 
functions.                          1.5+1.5 
Q29. With the help of suitable sports example explain the application of Newtons       3 
         third law in sports.                     
Q30. How we can enhance the performance with the help of self-talk and self-esteem.      1.5+1.5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
(SECTION D) 
Q31.  
 
I. Choose the function of boarding committee     1 
A. To take teams to the venue of match 
B. To provide them meals 
C. To take care of their stay 
D. To arrange opening ceremony 
II. What is the work of ceremony committee      1 
A. To take teams to the venue of match 
B. To provide them meals 
C. To take care of their stay 
D. To arrange opening ceremony 
III. Ground and equipment committee should not perform    1 
A.  To arrange teams match venues 
B. To provide them meals 
C. To take care of proper officiating 
D. To make fixtures 
IV. Why committees are required?  
A. To organize the event is perfect manner 
B. To distribute the work  
C. To make the best use of resources 
D. All of the above      1 
 
(Questions for Visually impaired) 
Ram is a secretary of state basketball association. He has given the responsibility to organize a sub- 
junior national tournament. He wants to organize the event at large scale and start distribution the 
work in various committees. He delegates the duties to different individual with authority and 
responsibility.  
(Answer the following questions on the basis of above paragraph) 
I. Which committee is responsible to make the event awareness: - 
A. Publicity Committee   C. Registration committee 
B. Hospitality      D. Transports  
      
 

6 
 
II. ………………. is the process of identifying and grouping the work to be performed. 
A. Planning     C. Organising 
B. Directing     D. Controlling 
 
   III. The reception committee for the tournament is responsible for ________ 
A. Welcoming the participants 
B. Arranging accommodation and meals for the participants 
C. Proper upkeep of the venues 
D. Welcoming the chief guest and spectators at the opening and closing ceremony 
 
IV. If the responsibility of a committee is to fix venue, date and timing of the sports events, 
it is a ________ 
A. Post meeting committee 
B. Pre meet committee 
C. During meet committee 
D. All the above 
 
Q32.                             
I. The first paralympics was organise in  
            A.1960       C. 1965 
            B. 1970      D. 1985 
 
II. Special education is a branch of education that deals with 
A. . Educating children in special schools 
B. Instructions designing for students with special needs 
C. To provide opportunity of special education 
D. More than one of the above 
 
III. Why is it called the Paralympics? 
A. The first competition was held in Paraguay 
 B. It was originally for paramilitary soldiers injured in WW2 
C.  The event runs parallel with the Olympics 
D.  It's an event for paraplegics 
 
IV . What is the motto of the Paralympic Games 
A. Spirit in motion 
B. Citius, Altius, Fortius" 
C.  "Faster, Higher, Stronger 
D. Diversity, Equality, Inclusion" 
 

7 
 
(Question for Visually Impared) 
Read the paragraph and answer the following question  
The Paralympic Games are a major international multi-sport event involving athletes with 
a range of physical disabilities, including impaired muscle power, impaired passive range 
of movement, limb deficiency, leg length difference, short stature, hypertoni a, ataxia, 
athetosis, vision impairment, and intellectual impairment.  
Dr. Ludwig Guttmann kownn as father of paralympic organized the first official Paralympic 
Games in Rome featuring 400 athletes from 23 countries. 
The Paralympics have grown significantly over the years, now attracting thousands of 
athletes from over 100 countries. The Paralympic movement has played a vital role in 
challenging societal perceptions of disability and in promoting the rights and inclusion 
of people with disabilities worldwide 
 
 
I. What is the primary focus of the Paralympic Games? 
A. To promote physical fitness among children 
B. To involve athletes with a range of physical disabilities in competitive sports 
C. To honor the history of the Olympic Games 
D. To raise funds for sports organizations 
II. Who organized the first event that eventually led to the creation of the Paralympic 
Games? 
A. Pierre de Coubertin    C. Lord Zeus 
B. Dr. Ludwig Guttmann   D. Norabji Tata 
  III. In which year were the first official Paralympic Games held? 
A. 1948                                                      C. 1960   
B. 1952                                                      D. 1964    
IV. Where were the first official Paralympic Games held? 
A.  Tokyo, Japan    C. Rome, Italy 
B. London, United Kingdom   D. Sydney, Australia 
 
 
 
Q33. 
                                              
 
I. What is the primary effect of exercise on cardio respiratory system.  1 
A.      Decreased heart rate 
B. Increased stroke volume 

8 
 
C. Decreased lung capacity  
D. Decreased blood pressure 
II. What is stroke volume        1 
A. The volume of blood ejected by the heart per minute  
B. The volume of blood ejected by the heart per beat  
C. The volume of blood in the ventricles at the end of diastole  
D. The volume of blood pumped by the heart during exercise 
III. Cardiac output is         1 
A. The volume of blood ejected by the heart per minute  
B.  The volume of blood ejected by the heart per beat  
C.  The volume of blood in the ventricles at the end of diastole  
D.  The volume of blood pumped by the heart during exercise 
 
 
IV. Blood pressure is         1 
A.  The volume of blood ejected by the heart per minute  
B.  The force exerted by blood against the walls of arteries  
C. The rate of blood flow through the veins  
D.  The amount of oxygen carried by red blood cells 
(Question for blind) 
Ramesh is an athlete of XYZ school. He is use to do 100m event for his school. He used to do 
hard work throughout the year to get his best performance. One day he got injury in winter 
season due to improper warming-up. He has been given first -aid before sent to hospital. 
I. Sprain is an injury of …. 
A. Ligament      C. Bone 
B. Muscle      D. Joint 
     II. In PRICE treatment I stands for 
A. Iceing      C. Incision 
B. Incline      D. Irritation 
 
   III.  Abrasion is a 
A. Type of fracture     C. Soft tissue injury 
B. Joint dislocation      D. Internal injury  
 
IV . Why warming up is necessary 
A. To avoid injuries     C. To increase body temperature 
B. To increase pulse rate     D. All the above 
      
 
 
 
 
9 
 
(SECTION E- Attempt any 3) 
 
Q34. List down a ny four asanas used for prevention of Hypertension. Explain the procedure, 
benefits and contraindicate of any one of them with help of a stick diagram.               1+4  
Q35. Discuss the purpose of Rikli & Jones fitness test and explain procedure of any two  
           test batteries in detail.            5                               
Q36.Define strength and differentiate between Isometric, Iso-tonic and Iso-kinetic exercises. 
                                   1+4 
Q37.What are the various types of friction? With the help of suitable example explain why friction 
is necessary in sports.                          2+3 

--- END PhysicalEducation-SQP-2024-25.pdf ---
--- START PhysicalEducation-MS-2024-25.pdf ---
PHYSICAL EDUCATION (048) 
Class XII 
2024-25 
Answer Key 
TIME ALLOWED: 3 HRS                                                     MAX. MARKS: 70 
 
1 
 
Q 
No. 
Answer Marks 
1. A. 18 1 
2. A.  Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct explanation of (A). 1 
3 A. I-3,  II-1,  III-4,  IV-2 1 
4      B. Protein 1 
5 B.     Halasana   1 
6 A. Bhujangasana 1 
7       C. 1924 1 
8 B. Beginning of menstrual period in women 1 
9       D. both a and c  
10      A.  I-2, II-1, III-4, IV-3 1 
11 B. Joint structure 1 
12 A. Lactic acid  1 
13 A law of Inertia 1 
14 A. Ice Skating  
15 A. Achieving goal 1 
16 A. Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct explanation of (A). 1 
17 A. specific 1 
18 A. Adaptation ability 1 
 Section B  
19 Q. Enlist different types of postural deformities. 
a. Kyphosis 
b. Lordosis 
c. Scoliosis 
 
½*4=2 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION (048) 
Class XII 
2024-25 
Answer Key 
TIME ALLOWED: 3 HRS                                                     MAX. MARKS: 70 
 
2 
 
d. Knock-Knee 
e. Flat Foot 
f. Bow legs 
(any four) 
 
Q20 How we can say that protein is an essential component of diet? 
• Protein is essential component of diet because protein is known as building block 
of life and it increase the strength of muscle fibers, repair and maintenance of 
body tissue and also connected with immune mechanism of the body.   
2 
 
 
Q21 Mention the test performed on 9 to 18 yrs. of age group in SAI KheloIndia fitness test and 
explain any one? 
a. Body Composition (BMI)  
b. Strength  
.    Abdominal (Partial Curl-up)  
     Muscular Endurance (Push Ups for Boys, Modified Push Ups for Girls)  
c. Flexibility (Sit and Reach Test)  
d. Cardiovascular Endurance (600 Meter Run/Walk)  
e. Speed (50 mt. Dash)  
 
 
½ *4 
=2 
Q22 Q. List down the types of bone injuries 
a. Stress fracture 
b. Green stick fracture 
c.  Comminuted fracture. 
d. Transverse Fracture 
e. Impacted fractures 
 
½ *4 
=2 
Q23.  What do you understand by the term goal setting? 
A. Goal setting is one of the best motivational strategies. It improves performance 
by directing attention, increasing effort and persistenc.       These goals can be 
short-term or long-term and are designed to help athletes focus their efforts, stay 
motivated, track progress, and ultimately improve their performance.                              
 
2 
Q24.  Define Flexibility and list down its type.  
PHYSICAL EDUCATION (048) 
Class XII 
2024-25 
Answer Key 
TIME ALLOWED: 3 HRS                                                     MAX. MARKS: 70 
 
3 
 
A. It is the ability which helps to do the movements with greater amplitude or with a 
great range of motion or we can say that flexibility  refers to the range of 
movement in a joint or series of joints, and length in muscles that cross the joints 
to induce a bending movement or motion.  
Type of Flexibility 
a. active & passive 
1+1 
 
 Section C  
Q25 Specify the purpose of specific sports programme organised for community services. 
A. These days it is very common that specific sports programmes are organised to make 
people aware regarding particular  cause or any particular issu e. These programmes 
are not related to competitions only, but it has special reason. They create awareness 
related to a disease like AIDS, Swine Flu, collecting funds for special cause like flood, 
earth quakes etc.  
 
3 
Q26 What are the health problem face by a woman due to female athlete triad in its sports and 
athletic performance. 
A. The female athlete triad is a problem face by a women consist of Eating Disorder, 
Osteoporosis and Amenorrhea. The following problem are faced by a woman due to 
the female athlete triad in sports performance: - 
a. Increased risk of injury 
b. Feeling tired 
c. Shortness of breath 
d. Stomach inflammation 
e. Muscle weakness 
f. Weak bones 
g. Hormonal imbalance 
h. Psychological effects. 
 
½*6 =3 
Q27. Write in detail the aims and objectives of paralympic committee 
A. The Paralympic games are a multi – sports event for athletes with physical, mental 
and sensorial disabilities. This includes mobility, disabilities, amputees, visual 
disabilities. The main objective of Paralympics are as follows: - 
 
3 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION (048) 
Class XII 
2024-25 
Answer Key 
TIME ALLOWED: 3 HRS                                                     MAX. MARKS: 70 
 
4 
 
a. Promote Para sport worldwide, without unlawful discrimination on the grounds 
of disability, race, skin colour, national, ethnic or social origin, age, sex, gender, 
sexual orientation, language, political or other opinion, religion or other beliefs, 
circumstances of birth, or other unlawful ground. 
b. Support and encourage educational and cultural activities and exchanges that 
contribute to the development and promotion of the Paralympic Movement, 
enhance awareness of disability, and drive social inclusion. 
Q28.  Differentiate between nutritive and nonnutritive components of a diet o 
Nutritive Component Non- Nutritive Component 
Nutritive components of food are 
those elements that provide a 
considerable quantity of energy to the 
system, such as protein, 
carbohydrates, and fats, all of which 
are essential to the body.  
Non-nutritive components of the diet are 
those components that do not have any 
nutritional value but are nonetheless 
necessary for the body in tiny quantities. 
Provide Energy Provide flavour and texture 
Support growth and repair Acts as food addictive 
Regulate metabolism Provide antioxidant 
 
 
1.5+1.5 
Q29. With the help of suitable sports example explain the application of Newtons third law in 
sports. 
A. Newton's third law states that for every action, there is an equal and opposite 
reaction. 
In swimming, Newton's third law is evident in the propulsion generated by a 
swimmer's arm strokes against the water. When a swimmer pulls their arm through 
the water with force (action), the water exerts an equal and opposite force backward 
on the swimmer's hand (reaction). This reaction force propels the swimmer forward 
through the water. 
 
3 
Q30.  How we can enhance the performance with the help of self-talk and self-esteem. 
A. Self-talk and self-esteem play significant roles in enhancing sports performance. 
Motivational self-talks are necessary and productive. It boosts performance by 
helping you to build confidence, enhance your belief in your ability to perform. It 
 
1.5+1.5 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION (048) 
Class XII 
2024-25 
Answer Key 
TIME ALLOWED: 3 HRS                                                     MAX. MARKS: 70 
 
5 
 
also athletes maintain a positive mindset, enhance their confidence, and improve 
their performance. 
Self-esteem is also crucial in sports performance. It helps in taking effective 
decision, Educed anxiety & stress.  Individuals with high self -esteem are better 
equipped to bounce back from setbacks and failures. 
Q31.  a. To take care of their stay 
d.  To arrange opening ceremony 
a. To provide them meals 
Committees are important for proper planning, organization, control during the 
tournament. 
Appropriate path and guidelines are provided by these committees during the 
tournament. Through committees all understand their work duties and responsibilities 
no body interferes in any others work. 
(Question for blind) 
There should be an organizing committee which should be responsible for the 
successful and smooth conduct of the sports competitions 
Committees required pre event:- 
Publicity Committee 
Committee for the ground and equipment 
Committee for Accommodation and Sitting Arrangements 
Committee for Entries 
Committees required during event:- 
Committee for First-Aid: 
Committee for Refreshment 
Committee for officials: 
Committee for Information and announcement 
Committees required post event:- 
Committee for closing ceremony 
Evaluation 
Record Maintenance 
 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Q32.  A)      i. 1960 
             B)    ii. Instructions designing for students with special needs 
            C)      iii  The event runs parallel with the Olympics 
            D) i. Spirit in motion 
(Question for Blind) 
1 
1 
1 
1 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION (048) 
Class XII 
2024-25 
Answer Key 
TIME ALLOWED: 3 HRS                                                     MAX. MARKS: 70 
 
6 
 
Inclusion in physical education refers to the students with disabilities to participate in all 
the activities. It means that these students get equal chance to participate in all activities, 
and they too learn the same curriculum just like other students. 
It helps in increases social skills of students with disabilities. Inclusion is needed to 
increase motor skills of students with disabilities. A disabled student gets equal chance to 
participate in age-appropriate activities so, it increases the confidence level. 
Q33 i. Decreased heart rate 
ii. The volume of blood ejected by the heart per beat 
i. The volume of blood ejected by the heart per minute 
ii. The force exerted by blood against the walls of arteries  
(Question for Blind) 
Long term effect of exercise on cardio respiratory system are: 
Increase in heart size:- Regular exercise leads to increase in size and strength of heart 
muscles. The heart wall grow stronger and thicker. 
Stroke volume increases at rest:- Resting heart rate is able to slow down , because the 
heart is now trained to pump a larger quantity of blood with every beat.  
Faster recovery rate:- Regular exercise leads to faster recovery rate. An athletes heart 
rate becomes normal earlier compared to a beginner. Rate of respiration also becomes 
normal quickly. Thus the recovery becomes fast. 
Short Term effect  
Short Term / Immediate Effect 
Increase in heart rate :- On of the short term effect is increase in heart rate, when we 
doing exercise the heart rate will continue to rise from its normal beat in direct proportion 
to the intensity of exercise until maximum heart rate is achieved. 
Cardiac Output:- It is the amount of blood the heart pumps in a period of one minute. It 
also increase during strenuous exercise. 
Blood Pressure:- The pressure exerted by blood on the wall of heart, The upper range is  
called systolic and bottom range is called diastolic. Regular exercise also have effect on 
our blood pressure, generally there is change in systolic pressure but the diastolic pressure 
usually remains unchanged during intensive exercise 
 
1 
1 
1 
1 
 
 Section E  
Q34.  List down any four asanas used for prevention of Hypertension. Explain the procedure, 
benefits and contraindicate of any one of them with help of a stick diagram.  
A. Blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your 
arteries. Each time your heart beats, it pumps blood into the arteries. 
The four asana used for the prevention of hypertension are as follows:- 
• Tadasana, 
• Katichakransan, 
 
2+3 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION (048) 
Class XII 
2024-25 
Answer Key 
TIME ALLOWED: 3 HRS                                                     MAX. MARKS: 70 
 
7 
 
• Uttanpadasana, 
• Ardha Halasana 
Procedure benefit and contraindication of Tadasana: 
Tadasana 
The word Tada in Sanskrit means ‘palm tree’. This asana is called tadasana 
because in this asana the person stands straight like a aim tree stretching his 
whole body upwards. 
Procedure: 
To perform Tadasana the following steps should be performed: 
1. Stand erect, feet together, hands by the side of the thighs. Keep the back 
straight and look in front. 
2. Stretch the arms upward; keep them straight and parallel to each other in 
vertical position, with the palms facing each other. 
3. Slowly, raise the heels as much as you can and stand on toes. Stretch body up 
as much as possible. 
4. Maintain the position for 5-10 seconds comfortably. 
5. To come back, bring the heels on the floor first. Slowly bring down the hands 
by side of the thighs and relax. 
Benefits: 
1. It gives stretch to whole body muscles. 
2. It helps in strengthening thighs, knees and ankles. 
3. By doing this asana regularly, children can increase their height. 
4. It helps to remove laziness and lethargy. 
Precautions 
1. The inner upper arms should touch the respective ears. 
2. Stretch the arms and fingers in full capacity. 
3. Keep the head, neck and the body in one straight line. 
4. Avoid bending forward or backward. 
Contraindications 
1. Those having complaints of vertigo should avoid practicing this asana. 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION (048) 
Class XII 
2024-25 
Answer Key 
TIME ALLOWED: 3 HRS                                                     MAX. MARKS: 70 
 
8 
 
Q35.  Discuss the purpose of Rikli & Jones fitness test and explain procedure of any two test 
batteries in detail. 
A. Even in old age, everybody wants to be able to continue to do what he wants, 
without pain, for as long as possible. It requires proper fitness during such age. 
In the beginning, there were not enough tests to assess the functional fitness. 
Recognizing the need for a tool to evaluate the functional fitness performance of 
older adults, Dr. Roberta Rikli and Dr. Jessie Jones developed the senior fitness 
test at Fullerton University. This test is also known as Fullerton Functional Test 
of senior citizens. The test is based on a functional fitness framework, which 
points out that being able to perform everyday activities. 
1. Chair stand test for lower body 1. Lower body strength, leg strength & strength 
Endurance 
2. Arm curl test for upper body 2. The upper body strength, arm flexor, strength, 
strength & endurance 
3. Chair sit & reach test for lower 3. The lower back flexibility 
body flexibility 
4. Back-scratch test for upper body 4. The upper body flexibility of the body flexibility 
& range of motion of the shoulders. 
5. Eight foot up & Go test for agility 5. The motor agility, speed & balance 
6. Six minute walk test for 6. Cardio-vascular endurance & recovery 
Chair Stand Test for Lower Body Strength 
Purpose: The purpose of the Chair-Stand is to measure the strength of lower body of 
adults over 60 years of age. Lower body strength is important for activities such as 
getting out of a chair, on the bus, out of the car, and rising up from a kneeling position 
in the house or garden. The strength of your lower body can directly affect the ease with 
which you perform the activities you do every day. 
Equipment required: A straight back or folding chair without arm rests (seat 17 
inches/44 cm high), stopwatch. 
Procedure: 
1) Place the chair against a wall where it will be stable. 
2+3 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION (048) 
Class XII 
2024-25 
Answer Key 
TIME ALLOWED: 3 HRS                                                     MAX. MARKS: 70 
 
9 
 
2) Sit in the middle of the chair with your feet flat on the floor, shoulder width apart, 
back straight. 
3) Cross your arms at the wrist and place them close to the chest. 
4) On the command ‘go’ you will rise up to a full stand 
and sit again as many times as you can during the 30 second interval. 
5) Count the total number of complete chair stands (up and down equals one stand). If 
the subject has completed a full stand from the sitting position when the time is elapsed, 
the final stand is counted 
in the total. 
Scoring: The score is the number of completed chair stands in 30 seconds. Below is a 
table showing the recommended ranges for this test based on age groups. 
Arm Curl (Bicep) Test for Upper Body Strength 
Purpose: This test measures upper body strength and endurance. 
Equipment required: 5-pound weight (women), 8-pound weight (for men). A chair 
without arm rests, stopwatch. 
Procedure: 
1) The subject sits on the chair holding the weight in the hand using a suitcase grip 
(palm facing towards the body). 
2) This test is conducted on the dominant arm side (or 
stronger side). 
3) On the command ‘go’ do as many curls as you can in the allotted 30 second time 
period. 
4) Do not swing the weight. 
5) If you have started raising the weight again and are over 
halfway up when time is called, you may count that curl. 
Scoring: The score is the total number of controlled arm curls 
performed in 30 seconds. Below is a table showing some 
recommended ranges for this test based on age groups. 
 
 
Q36.  Define strength and differentiate between Isometric, Iso-tonic and Iso-kinetic exercises.  
PHYSICAL EDUCATION (048) 
Class XII 
2024-25 
Answer Key 
TIME ALLOWED: 3 HRS                                                     MAX. MARKS: 70 
 
10 
 
Strength is the ability of muscles to overcome the resistance.  Strength is necessary for 
the performance of physical activities, whether it is a physical activity associated with 
daily living. 
Barrow and McGee have defined “Strength as, ‘The Capacity of the whole body or any 
of it’s ports to exert force.’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1+4 

PHYSICAL EDUCATION (048) 
Class XII 
2024-25 
Answer Key 
TIME ALLOWED: 3 HRS                                                     MAX. MARKS: 70 
 
11 
 
 
Q37 What are the various types of friction? With the help of suitable example explain why 
friction is necessary in sports 
A. Friction is a force which oppose efforts to slide or roll one body over another. 
Without friction it would be impossible to walk or run but on the other hand it 
increases the difficulty of moving. 
   The amount of friction between one surface and another depends upon the nature of the 
surface and forces pressing them together generally speaking smooth surface have less 
friction than rough. 
Types of Friction:- 
• Static Friction:- is the opposing force which acts between two surface in which 
one tends to move over the other 
• Dynamic Friction: - which acts between two surfaces in which one is actually 
moving over the other it may be two types. 
– Sliding 
– Rolling  
Friction is both helpful in sports: Friction is Necessary: Nothing would be able to move 
without friction. Friction is how things accelerate. Without friction we would not be able 
to walk we would just be slipping. Without friction we cannot give better performance in 
sports. Examples: athletes use spikes and footballers use studs to have appropriate friction 
while they run fast.A Gymnast uses lime powder on his/her palms to perform many 
activities like horizontal bar uneven bar Roman Rings. In Badminton players are usually 
seen to rub their sole of shoes with lime before going  to tlhe wooden court. It is done to 
provide better grip on the floor so that one can move safely 
 
 
 
2+3 

--- END PhysicalEducation-MS-2024-25.pdf ---
