from his fellow team members. He trains regularly at a Swim club and is guided by National
and Olympic level coaches including former world record holder Annamay Pierce, Anna
Lydall and few other specialists to improve his technique and performance. He has a
rigorous training schedule, which includes 1-2 hours of swimming each day, 3-4 days of
dryland training, power yoga and playing basketball for overall fitness. He is on a high
protein and low carb diet. His regular day begins at 5:30 am with dryland exercises, followed
by school, then swimming and ends at around 11 pm.
Yash also played on his school’s Cricket and Bowling Team. In 2017, his school cricket team
was awarded the Mayor’s School Cricket Excellence Award. He also participated in the Track
and Field events.
Sports has played an important role in his healthy growth and overall development. He has
grown into a well-rounded young man with strong character, self-discipline and high values.
He greatly benefitted from the conducive and inclusive environment provided by his school,
here and in India. He now wants to explore avenues to learn new skills. His first step in this
direction started with being a Volunteer at a Community library and he has not looked back
since then. The dedication and sincerity of his work has earned kudos from his colleagues.
Presently, Yash has graduated with majors in Hospitality and Tourism. Apart from
representing his country at international competitions, Yash wants to pursue a career in the
Hospitality industry and lead a successful and an independent life. He is an inspirational role
model for inclusion.
In his words, “Pursuing swimming helps me to achieve my dreams by focussing on my
strengths.”
Read the profile of one of an Indian athlete to win a Bronze Medal in the Special Olympics
World Summer Games 2015 in Los Angeles.. Get into groups and discuss his/her
achievements.
What do you think motivated him/her? Are there any messages in his/her story that inspire
you?
4.3.4 Oppositional Defiant Disorder
Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD) is a behaviour disorder mostly diagnosed in childhood.
Children with ODD are uncooperative, defiant, and hostile toward peers, parents, teachers,
and other authority figures. They are more troubling to others than they are to themselves.
Children with anxiety issues and ADHD are more likely to have ODD.
ODD can vary in severity:
 Mild. Symptoms occur only in one setting, such as only at home, school, work or with
peers.
[143]
 Moderate. Some symptoms occur in at least two settings.
 Severe. Some symptoms occur in three or more settings.
Symptoms of ODD
Angry and irritable mood.
 often and easily loses temper
 is frequently touchy and easily annoyed by others
 is often angry and resentful
Argumentative and defiant behaviour.
 often argues with adults or people in authority
 often actively defies or refuses to comply with adults' requests or rules
 often deliberately annoys or upsets people
 often blames others for his or her mistakes or misbehaviour
Vindictiveness.
 is often spiteful or vindictive
 has shown spiteful or vindictive behaviour at least twice in the past six months
Children and teenagers with oppositional defiant disorder may have trouble at home with
parents and siblings, in school with teachers, and at work with supervisors and other
authority figures.
Children with ODD may struggle to make and keep friends and relationships. ODD may lead
to problems such as:
 poor school and work performance
 antisocial behaviour
 impulse control problems
 substance use disorder
 suicide
4.3.5 Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) is a anxiety disorder where people feel the need to
check things repeatedly, perform certain routines repeatedly (called "rituals"), or have
certain thoughts repeatedly (called "obsessions"). They are unable to control either the
thoughts or the activities for more than a short period of time. Common activities include
hand washing, counting of objects, and checking to see if a door is locked, putting things in
[144]
certain order, checking that they have completed some action, usually checking a certain
number of times. Obsessions are repeated, persistent and unwanted thoughts, urges or
images that are intrusive and cause distress or anxiety. As a result, the person may try to
ignore them or get rid of them by performing a compulsive behaviour or ritual. These
obsessions typically intrude when the person is trying to think of or doing other things. OCD
usually begins in the teens or young adult years, but it can start in childhood too. Symptoms
usually begin gradually and tend to vary in severity throughout life. The types of obsessions
and compulsions you experience can also change over time.
Symptoms generally worsen when the person experiences greater stress. OCD, usually
considered a lifelong disorder, can have mild to moderate symptoms or be so severe and
time- consuming that it becomes disabling.
Obsessions often have themes such as:
 Fear of contamination or dirt
 Doubting and having difficulty tolerating uncertainty
 Needing things orderly and symmetrical
 Aggressive or horrific thoughts about losing control and harming yourself or others
 Unwanted thoughts, including aggression, or sexual or religious subjects As with
obsessions, compulsions typically have themes, such as:
 Washing and cleaning
 Checking
 Counting
 Orderliness
 Following a strict routine
I. Tick the correct options.
1. What type of disorder is ADHD?
(a) Mental Disorder
(b) Emotional Disorder
(c) Behavioural Disorder
(d) Genetic Disorder
2. Putting things in certain order is a sign of
(a) OCD
[145]
(b) ODD
(c) ASD
(d) SPD
3. A disorder that may also be categorised as an intellectual disability is
(a) Autism
(b) Cerebral palsy
(c) Down Syndrome
(d) ADHD
4. World Autism day is celebrated on
(a) 2nd April
(b) 29th August
(c) 21st June
(d) 3rd December
II. Answer the following questions briefly.
1. Write a short note on Attention Deficit Hyperactive Disorder.
2. List the signs and symptoms of Oppositional Defiant Disorder.
3. What do you know about Sensory Processing Disorder?
III. Answer the following question in 150—200 words
1. What are the characteristics of Autism spectrum disorder?
4.4.1 Disability Etiquette
Disability Etiquette is a set of guidelines dealing specifically with how to approach a person
with a disability. Disability etiquette refers to communicating and interacting respectfully
and courteously with people who have disabilities.
Positive and Energetic Attitude – One should approach a person with special needs with
positive energy and attitude. Approach should be warm and friendly. One should not show
sympathy for, or, even in certain cases, fear of the person.
[146]
Picture Source6
Communication - Communication should be two way – speaking to the person directly, and
not to the person accompanying her/him. Establish a rapport with her/him. If necessary, use
a communication aid such as a communication book or communication device, if required.
Keep your tone low. Communicate with the individual slowly and clearly. Give them time to
respond. While writing, or talking to or about a person with a disability, use “people first”
language. Refer to her/him as a person with disability and not as “the disabled” or “the
handicapped.” Avoid referring to people by their disability. For example, do not say, “She is
an epileptic.” Instead, say, “She has epilepsy.” Do not say “wheelchair-bound” or “confined
to a wheelchair.” Most wheelchair users perceive their wheelchair as liberating, not
confining. Do say, “She uses a wheelchair.” Do not use negative, demeaning, and outdated
terms such as “cripple,” “deaf and dumb,” or “retarded.” Be aware that many people with
disabilities do not wish to be referred to euphemistically. So, avoid using terms such as
“physically challenged,” or “differently abled.” Also, avoid referring to an individual with a
disability as someone who is “suffering from Cerebral Palsy or Parkinson’s.”
Social Etiquette – Make surroundings disabled-friendly and comfortable for people with
special needs. Do not make assumptions about what they can or cannot do. The impact of a
specific disability can vary widely from person to person, so help only if it appears to be
needed. Just because someone has a disability, don’t assume she needs help. If the setting is
accessible, people with disabilities can usually get around fine. Adults with disabilities want
[147]
to be treated as independent people. Offer assistance only if the person appears to need it.
A person with a disability will oftentimes communicate when she needs help. And if she
does want help, ask how before you act. Acknowledge and respect the individual’s ability to
make decisions and judgments on their own behalf. Never physically or verbally bully them.
Never play with their equipment. Ask them before offering any help. Only ask question
about their disability if you know the person. Develop a culture of inclusion in surroundings.
Physical Etiquette - The height difference between a person in a wheelchair and an able-
bodied person can create an unspoken feeling of superiority and inferiority. To be safe, sit
or stand at eye-level with the person who has a disability when it is appropriate and
possible. Finding a table to sit at is a great option because it can eliminate any visible
differences, such as a wheelchair.
Sitting in a chair (with or without a table) is also better than kneeling, which may cause the
person in a wheelchair to feel like a child. Make eye contact; never avoid someone with a
disability. Some people with disabilities depend on their arms for balance. Grabbing them,
even if your intention is to assist, could knock them off balance. Avoid patting a person on
the head or touching his wheelchair, or cane. People with disabilities consider their
equipment part of their personal space.
I. Tick the correct option
1. You have a new classmate who has a disability and has an interpreter as She/He has
just joined your school. She/He speaks to you. You will
i. communicate with the interpreter
ii. stare between the interpreter and your classmate
iii. speak directly to your classmate
iv. look at neither your classmate nor the interpreter.
II. Answer the following questions briefly
1. What is the role of positive and energetic attitude in dealing with person with
Disability?
2. How can you make a person with disability feel comfortable?
3. Disability etiquettes has a big role to give a sense of acceptance to person with
disability. Explain how?
III. Answer the following question in 150—200 words
1. Explain what ettiquette should one keep in mind while communicating with a person
with special needs?
[148]
4.5.1 Advantages of Physical Activities for CWSN
It is no secret that physical activities are an important aspect of a healthy lifestyle and can
provide significant benefits for children in all developmental stages. Children with special
needs have less opportunities to be less physically active and, therefore, are at higher risk
for complications associated with inactivity. The benefits of regular physical activity for
children with special needs can range from physical, emotional and social. CWSN
demonstrate strength gains, increased flexibility, improved bone health, and better
endurance and cardiovascular fitness as a result of regular physical activity. In the case of
children with movement disabilities, physical activity is important in maintenance of
mobility throughout the aging process. With enhanced physical health, children are better
able to fight problems such as obesity and the associated health complications that may
follow. Physical activity can also improve general mood and wellness. Regular fitness can be
linked to improved self-esteem, social awareness, and self- confidence, which aid in
empowering the lives of children with special needs.
1. Physical benefits – Scientific studies into disability groups have demonstrated that
participation in physical activity and sport leads to improved levels of well-being and
physical health. Children with intellectual disabilities may have additional physical
disabilities resulting in below age-level performance in typical motor skills. Regular
involvement in physical education and sport can help them to develop their gross
motor and fine motor skills which may improve their overall performance. When
encouraged to participate in a regular fitness routine, many CWSN show improvement
in everything from their hand-eye coordination and flexibility, to their muscle strength,
endurance, and even cardiovascular efficiency. These are all simply the natural
benefits of exercise. This development of better motor skills and enhanced physical
health helps individuals to fight back against problems such as obesity, and the health
complications that follow.
2. Mode of Recreation and Fun -- CWSN frequently miss out on social activities,
recreation and fun. Participation in extracurricular and sports activities can help them
overcome this obstacle, providing them with the ability to engage in social
interactions, make friends and initiate social skills.
3. Improved Emotional Health -- Including physical activity in a healthy lifestyle is proven
to decrease rates of depression. CWSN often tend to have more emotional problems
like depression. Participating in regular exercise can be a life-changing benefit by
improving mental health and wellbeing. Physical activity can also improve general
mood and wellness, which aid in empowering the lives of children with special needs.
[149]
4. Channelizing the Surplus Energy – Children with disabilities like ADHD display
hyperactivity that, if appropriately directed, can bear positive results regarding
cognitive benefits and constructive behaviour.
5. Psychological benefits –Regular participation in sports and physical activities is not
just beneficial for the body, it is beneficial for the mind, too. Physical activity improves
general mood and wellness in CWSN by improving their self-esteem, social awareness,
and self- confidence, all of which are factors essential for empowering their lives. On
the one hand the physical outlet provided by sports and physical activity reduces
anxiety, stress and depression, and on the other, interaction and involvement with
other students gives children a sense of accomplishment and confidence. For CWSN,
developing a sense of self-esteem is particularly important, as they may often feel
isolated and removed from the group.
6. Healthy lifestyle – CWSN are about twice as likely as other children to be overweight
or obese often due to the related greater likelihood of being sedentary. As a result of
their disability, their levels of participation in sports and physical activity is much lower
than their peers. It is imperative that these children, as much or more, than other
students must learn what about the steps to leading a healthy lifestyle, within the
context of the abilities and limitations of their respective conditions.
7. Behavioural Benefits – The energetic nature of physical education leads to cognitive
improvements in CWSN, allowing them to develop skills that they may not develop in a
traditional classroom setting. Sports and Games are a structured activity with a set of
rules and organisation. They help the chid learn to practice self-regulation and
enhance their decision- making skills. In addition, CWSN can learn to focus on specific
goals, and work on their verbal communication by interacting with peers on the sports
field. Sports and Physical education teach children a range of skills that including
teamwork, problem solving abilities, increased attention span, and focus on task-based
behaviour. Eventually, these skills can transfer into other classroom settings too, so
that CWSN have a greater ability to learn and engage with their peers outside of
physical education.
8. Increased Independence – Participation in Physical Education and Sports is a mode to
transit towards greater independence due to improved daily life skills. For a person
with a disability, an increase in physical activity can lead to more independence and
freedom. Increased physical strength and energy that come from regular exercise
allows persons with disability to do more daily tasks without assistance.
[150]
4.6.1 Strategies to Make Physical Activities Accessible for CWSN
Participation in physical activity is beneficial for all children, including those with disabilities.
In fact, participation of children with disabilities in sports and recreational activities
promotes inclusion, minimizes deconditioning, optimizes physical functioning, and enhances
overall well- being. Despite these benefits, children with disabilities are more restricted in
their participation, have lower levels of fitness, and have higher levels of obesity than their
peers without disabilities. Well-informed decisions regarding each child's participation must
consider certain well-devised strategies.
Communication – Advance information about
activity, space, resource person or any change in
activity should be communicated clearly. A variety of
different instructional strategies such as verbal,
visual and peer teaching should be used for
performing various types of physical activities so that
children get opportunity to participate in physical
activity. The teacher could use visuals or social story
about the activity. Give positive, corrective or
specific feedback. As per the ability of the child,
specific instruction must be provided in simple words and sentences. The tone should be
low and one instruction should be given at a time. If necessary, a communication board or
communication book could be used.
Space – For CWSN, space should be approachable for
people having physical disability. The area for the physical
activity should be limited. Space for activities should be
disturbance free (noise, heat, cold, texture of floor,
audience etc.) It is always better to start with indoor
space. Boundaries should be demarked clearly as starting
point, finishing point, sitting area. In case of children who
have autism, they must be provided specific area because
they may need some time to relax. Once behaviours,
discipline, understanding of instructions are clear then one can transit towards outdoor
space also. It does not mean that one is not allowed to go to outdoor sports.
Equipment -- A lack of appropriate equipment, coupled with a lack of professionals trained
to support physical activity among children and youth with different ability levels,
discourages participation. There are a growing number of disabled people who are
interested in recreation and sport activities. In recent years several modified devices are on
offer for adapted sports. There are many examples of simple and sophisticated equipment,
[151]
including computerized devices like wheelchairs for recreation and sport activities. There
are sport competitions involving four groups of disabled sportspersons, namely 1) the deaf,
2) people with physical disability, 3) people with intellectual (mental) disability, 4) people
supported by specially designed high level engineering equipment. All of them can use many
kinds of equipment and facilities.
[152]
Graded Activities– During initial stage activities should be simple and the activity should
be based on a single action. There should be a gradual move from non-locomotor to locomotor to
manipulated activities. For these activities, the level of assistance should be physical, verbal and
independent. CWSN need help children in learning a fundamental motor skill. It will need to be
practised with the students so they are able to see visualize it through the teacher’s body action or
one can use
videos. As they watch the video, words or phrases that highlight the important part on
which the demonstration is focusing must be used. They could also be asked to demonstrate
the skill to ensure the instructions have been understood before commencing practise and
they must start practice immediately after viewing a demonstration. The activity must be
practised with progressive count, or even performed dramatically with rhymes or songs with
voice modulation so they enjoy the activities.
Do you know?
Locomotor skills include running, jumping, hopping, galloping, rolling, leaping and dodging,
horizontal jump, slide.
Manipulative skills are throwing, catching, kicking, striking and trapping, dribble, overhand
throw, and underhand roll
Stability skills are balance, twisting, turning and bending
[153]
Social strategies - Allow the child to choose a sport she/he enjoys. It’s easier for children to
be motivated when they enjoy the activity. At first, encourage the child with special needs
to watch others. Let the child see people having fun as they play. Then, start with individual
training, transfer to small group with supervision and reminder. Be a mediator to interact
with other members of group. Keep individual check on each person participation and
motivate them with reminder whenever they get distraction. End the lesson with positive
feedback and each person greet with other before the session and after the sessions.
Psychological strategies – Because of previous exclusion or limited access, children with
disabilities need a lot of motivation to participate in physical activity. It’s all about the cycle
of conditioning: active kids who stay active grow stronger and more physically literate as
they age. The cycle of deconditioning works the same way: for children who don’t
participate, the less they do, the less they’re able to do. In fact, “Psychological barriers are
the most influential.
Changing attitudes is the key to increasing participation...” These barriers include attitudes,
opinions and perceptions preventing participation in sport.
 Personal attitudes of persons with disability
 Attitudes of non-disabled people
All individuals benefit from regular physical activity and children with special needs
especially gain from these physical, mental and social benefits of being active. Once children
see improvements in muscle strength, coordination, and flexibility and experience better
balance, motor skills and body awareness, they will have positive changes towards sports. It
has been found that children with a disability choose to play sport for a number of reasons
including
[154]
 to improve and learn new skills,
 to have fun,
 stay fit
 be physically challenged
While children often choose easier tasks to obtain rewards, doing this decreases the child’s
enjoyment of and intrinsic motivation for the activity. So, the selection of a challenging
activity may be a strong influence in children’s participation in sport. However, it may be
possible that if the challenge becomes too great, the intrinsic motivation to participate may
decrease. Because the level of challenge frequently increases more quickly for the disabled
it is likely that this is a strong factor in participation. Therefore, it is better to let the child
initially participate with her/his own disability group. Coaches are also often afraid to ‘push’
individuals with a disability too far and doing ‘harm’ to the individuals. In contrast to
intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation involves motivators from the environment (e.g.
friends, parents and coaches).
Certainly amongst children it can be expected that a huge part of their reasoning for
participation in sport is to make friends. Children with strong peer relationships are more
self-motivated in sport and, in addition, enjoy themselves more. It has also been found that
a greater competence in sport coincided with stronger peer relationships. A PE teacher in
UK revealed that her pupils “actively encourage and support the pupils with disabilities” in
sport and that those pupils “grow in confidence as a result of their involvement”. Disability
in sport is, evidently, becoming more accepted than it ever has been.
I. Answer the following questions briefly.
1. How wll you communicate with a classmate suffering from cognitive disability?
2. In what ways does participation in sports and games benefit a person with disability?
II. Answer the following question in 150-200 words.
1. How will you motivate a classmate with disability to take part in games and sports?
Art Inclusion
Working in groups, design a booklet for your school library on Disability Etiquette.
1. Think of the etiquettes you feel need to be included.
2. Draw Graphics to accompany the etiquettes.
3. Laminate the pages and get your book spiral-bound.
[155]
References :
1 THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ACT, 2016. (n.d.). Retrieved 11 25, 2020, from MINISTRY
OF LAW AND JUSTICE: http://legislative.gov.in/actsofparliamentfromtheyear/rights-persons
disabilities-act-2016
2 International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). (n.d.). Retrieved 11 25, 2020,
from World Health Organization: https://www.who.int/standards/classifications/international-
classification-of-functioning-disability-and-health
3 FACTS ABOUT DOWN'S SYNDROME. (2020, January). Retrieved 11 25, 2020, from
https://www.magzter.com/article/Business/UNIQUE-TIMES/FACTS-ABOUT-DOWNS-SYNDROME
4 PAREEK, S. (2014, 08 11). The Man Who Beat Polio To Grab A Silver Medal At The Commonwealth
Games 2014. Retrieved 11 25, 2020, from https://www.thebetterindia.com/13206/rahelu/
5 Astejada, M. (2007). Muscular Dystrophy. Retrieved 11 25, 2020, from
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/neuroscience/muscular-dystrophy
6 Disability Etiquette. (2020, 10 6). Retrieved 11 25, 2020, from Ohio university:
https://u.osu.edu/tops/2020/10/06/disability-etiquette/
Suggested Reading :
 (n.d.). Retrieved 11 25, 2020, from Adapted Physical Education National Standards:
https://apens.org/
 WORLD REPORT ON DISABILITY. (2011). Retrieved 11 25, 2020, from
https://www.who.int/disabilities/world_report/2011/report.pdf
 American Association Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities. (n.d.). Retrieved 11
25, 2020, from https://www.aaidd.org/intellectual-disability
 Auxter, D. (2010). Principles and methods of Adapted Physical Education and
Recreation. New York: McGraw-Hill.
 Kranowitz, C., & Miller, L. J. (2006). The Out-of-Sync Child: Recognizing and Coping with
Sensory Processing Disorder. USA: Penguin .
[156]
CHAPTER-V: CHILDREN AND WOMEN IN SPORTS
Contents
• Motor development and factors affecting it.
• Exercise guidelines at different stages of growth and development.
• Common postural deformities-knock knees, flat foot, round shoulders, Lordosis,
Kyphosis, Scoliosis and bow legs and their respective corrective measures.
• Sports participation of women in India.
• Special consideration (menarche and menstrual dysfunction)
• Female athlete triad (osteoporosis, amenorrhea, eating disorders)
Learning outcomes
At the end of the chapter, you will be able to:
 understand the concept of motor development and factors affecting it.
 discuss exercise guidelines for different stages of growth and development.
 classify common postural deformities and identify corrective measures.
 recognize the role and importance of sports participation of women in India.
 identify special consideration relate to menarche and menstrual dysfunction.
 express female athlete triad according to eating disorders.
Discussion
Given below is a list of some common postural deformities children may suffer from. What
do you know about them? Complete the first two columns of the KWL Chart given below.
Fill in the last column after completing your research by reading more about them.
Word What I Know What I Want to Know What I Learned
Knock knees
Flat foot
Round shoulders
Lordosis
Kyphosis
Scoliosis
Bow legs
[157]
5.1.1 Motor Development
Before we start discussion on the term Motor Development, let us start with the basic
understanding about it. The word Motor, here, refers to movement of human body,
whereas the word Development refers to growth and changes that occur as life progresses.
Such changes may be result of age or experience. Thus, we can say that motor development
refers to the development of a child’s bones, muscles and ability to move around and
manipulate her or his environment.
Motor Development refers to “the changes in motor behaviour over the lifespan and the
processes which underlie these changes” Clark, J. E.& Whitall, J. (1989). What is motor
development? The lessons of history. Quest, 41, 183-202.
Human motor development is “the study of the changes in human motor behaviour over
the lifespan, the processes that underlie these changes, and the factors that affect them.”
Payne, V. G., & Isaacs, L. D. (2012). Human Motor Development: A Lifespan Approach.
McGraw Hill.
“Motor development is the continuous change in motor behaviour throughout the life cycle,
brought about by interaction among the requirements of the movement task, the biology of
the individual, and the conditions of the environment.” David L. Gallahue, J. C. (2012).
Understanding Motor Development: Infants, Children, Adolescents, Adults. McGraw-Hill
Education.
5.1.2 Domains of Motor Development
There are four domains of motor development
Physical
Motor
Cognitive Psychomotor
Developme
Affective
[158]
Cognitive domain: It is concerned with intellectual development of a child. We can take the
example of class 4 boy who is sitting in the class room. We can examine his cognitive aspects
by asking history question for remembering, maths question for analytical abilities, science
question for application etc.
Affective domain: It is primarily concerned with emotional and social aspect of a child. We
can understand this domain by asking questions like how the child feels while interacting
with her/his classmates, teachers etc.
Psychomotor domain: It is concerned with body movements and factors that affect
movements. We can examine the child’s psychomotor domain by examining her/his
handwriting, movements of running, throwing, catching, jumping etc.
Physical domain: It is concerned with body changes take place during the life span. We can
examine physical domain by testing fitness, height, weight, fat etc.
An example which can demonstrate all four domains of motor development is a man
crossing the road. He must have knowledge of road safety rules, be fit enough to cross the
road, have movements that are well-coordinated and a positive attitude towards observing
the rules of the road.
Motor development should be organized and systematic. To learn to throw a ball, the
process will be to first hold the ball, then release the ball, next drop the ball, bounce the
ball, roll the ball, and finally throw the ball with both hands, with one hand and later
overarm or underarm throw etc.
Motor development can be assessed by the product or process. In running a race, time is a
product and running is a process, in shotput distance is a product and putting the shot is the
process.
We can classify Motor Movements under the following heads.
Muscular Environmental Functional Temporal
Aspect Aspect Aspect Aspect
•Gross Motor •Open Motor •Stability Skill •Discrete
Skill Skill •Locomotor Motor Skill
•Fine Motor •Closed Motor Skill •Serial Motor
Skill Skill •Manipulative Skill
Skill •Continuous
Motor Skill
5.1.3 Gross and Fine Motor Skills
On the basis of muscular development, Motor development can be divided into two major
areas: gross motor skills and fine motor skills.
[159]
Gross motor skills include activities that involve moving major areas of the body. Activities
like running, jumping, climbing, throwing, standing, and sitting are examples of gross motor
skills.
Fine motor skills require more precision and involve hand and eye coordination. These
skills, which seem simple to adults, require concentration for children to develop them. A
snooker shot is an example of fine motor skill.
Extension Activity
Working in pairs, list the following activities into Gross and Fine Motor Skills.
 Climbing up, down, over, under and through things
 Completing shape puzzles
 Cutting shapes with scissors
 Dumping and filling a bucket
 Jumping
 Making shapes with play dough
 Running
 Stacking blocks
 Stringing beads
 Throwing and catching
5.1.4 Open and Closed Motor Skills
Sports skills can be classified according to how much they are affected by the sporting
environment. Environmental stimuli include
Other people – for example, a netballer reacting to their own and the other team's players
Terrain/surface – for example, a cross-country runner running on muddy and dry ground
Weather – for example, a golfer playing on a windy day
Situation – for example, the venue and crowd
Performers need to have a good perception of these stimuli to adapt their skills to best suit
the environment. These skills may be divided into Open and Closed Skills.
Open skills: An open motor skill is a skill performed in an unstable environment, where the
start point is determined by the environment. Team-based sports such as Netball, Football,
and Hockey involve open skills where the environment is continually changing, and so
movements have to be continually adapted.
Closed skills: A closed motor skill is a skill which is performed in a stationary environment,
where the performer chooses when to start the skill. These skills take place in a stable, non-
[160]
team based, predictable environment, and the performer knows what to do and when. For
example, a free throw in Basketball and serving in Squash or Tennis.
5.1.5 Stability, Locomotor and Manipulative Skills
Fundamental movement skills provide a foundation for many physical activities including
play, games, outdoor recreation and sports. Having these skills is an essential part of
enjoyable participation and a lifelong interest in an active lifestyle. Fundamental movement
skills include stability, locomotive, and manipulative or object control and skills.
Stability skills involve the body balancing either in one place (static) or while in motion
(dynamic). Stability skills in this resource include landing, balance (static and dynamic) and
rotation.
Locomotor Skills involve the body moving in any direction from one point to another.
Locomotor skills include walking, running, dodging, jumping, hopping and skipping.
Manipulative skills involve handling and controlling objects with the hand, the foot or an
implement (stick, bat or racquet). Manipulative skills in this resource include throwing and
catching, striking with the hands, feet and an implement (e.g. kicking, volleying, batting and
dribbling).
5.1.6 Discrete, Serial and Continuous Motor Skills
The Temporal Aspect refers to the organisation of the motor skill in time,
Discrete skills are brief, well-defined actions that have a clear beginning and end. They are
single, specific skills, which make up the actions involved in a variety of sports such as hitting
and throwing. For example, a penalty flick in Hockey.
Serial Skills are a group of discrete skills strung together to make a new and complex
movement. For example, the sequence of skills for the triple jump.
Continuous skills have no obvious beginning or end. The end of one cycle of movements is
the beginning of the next, and the skill is repeated like a cycle. These skills could be stopped
at any moment during the performance of the skill. For example, Swimming, Running,
Cycling.
[161]
Extension Activity
The physical abilities of a one-year-old are much different than the abilities of a five-year-
old. Complete the table listing the abilities of both.
One-year-old Five-year-old
Movement
Playing
5.1.7 Factors that Affect Motor Development
Unhealthy
lifestyle of
mother
Personal Genetic
Factors factors
Factors affecting
Motor
Development
Early Stages
of Learning
Development
Psychological
Factors
Human beings are different from others in terms of personality, appearance, motor
movements etc. As a result, the rate and level of motor development also varies. Therefore,
to understand the stages of Motor development it is essential we discuss factors that affect
it. The primary factors affecting Motor development are individual ability, environment and
the given task.
Do you know
Developmental milestones are behaviours or physical skills seen in infants and children as
they grow and develop. Rolling over, crawling, walking, and talking are all considered
[162]
milestones. The milestones are different for each age range. There is a normal range in
which a child may reach each milestone.
Delayed milestones, also called developmental delays, describes the condition where a
child does not reach one of these stages at the expected age.
Let us study factors affecting Motor development in detail.
1. Lifestyle of mother: An individual’s growth and development journey starts in the
mother’s womb as a zygote. For the next nine months of foetal period the zygote
develops extremities, teeth, nose, eyes, ears, central nerve system etc. During this
period the baby is totally dependent on the mother. As a result, the mother lifestyle
affects the baby. An unhealthy lifestyle like imbibing certain medicines, drugs,
smoking, alcohol and other unhealthy food leads to growth deficiency, CNS
dysfunctions, other anomalies and complications. Maternal nutrition should be
balanced and must include all nutrients like protein, calcium, iron-rich foods, vitamins,
and extra calories as per requirement of the body.
2. Genetic factors: Abnormal development can be caused by gene-based disorders or
chromosomal disorders. Deformities like heart defects, respiratory distress syndrome,
Musculo-skeletal deformities etc. and Down Syndrome, which includes short stature,
late or no speech development, slow development of fine motor skills etc. may
happen due to genetic factors.
3. Learning: Learning is one of the important factors that affect growth and
development. Learning requires readiness to seek or acquire new information or skills.
A child must be physiologically ready to develop strength, endurance and flexibility
that will help to control the body, and psychologically ready to acquire skills. In other
words, the child must be physically and mentally ready to seek information.
Motivation and timely reinforcement promote learning. Individual differences
including race, gender, culture and socioeconomic status may affect growth and
development process.
4. Psychological Factors: Self-esteem plays an important role in growth and development
of the individual. An individual with high self-esteem in the physical arena is not likely
to give up physical activity. It motivates her/him to join and sustain the particular
activity. Other factors including self-confidence, self-worth, self-image, emotions, also
play a vital role in growth and development.
5. Early Stages: Portents and teaches should work on a programme where stimulation
and deprivation are given systematically. While the more stimulation and
opportunities a child is provided in order to develop both gross and fine motor skills,
the faster her/his capacity increases. For instance, if a child is encouraged to play
outside on park equipment or other areas where she/he can climb, run, and play,
[163]
her/his gross motor skills will develop quickly. Additionally, fine motor skills develop
when children are encouraged to play with their hands, hold and touch smaller items,
feed themselves, and draw or colour. Timely immunization also helps to prevent
disease from child and would not hinder learning process. However, we must keep in
mind the child’s readiness to learn. Now-a-days parents provide stimulation too early
like focus on swimming, reading, writing etc in early stages. This may have an adverse
effect on the child’s growth and development.
6. Personal Factors: Physical characteristics, intelligence, aptitude, height, weight, age,
muscle fibres, length of fibres, bone structure, gender, diseases are factors that affect
motor development. Taking a balanced diet or proper proportion of nutrition in food is
required to promote motor development. Malnutrition leads to disease, low
immunity, and adversely affects the child’s health and motor development. Starvation,
overeating, eating disorders negatively affect motor development leading to obesity,
diabetes, heart disease etc. Good fitness level leads to good health, better reflexes and
readiness of muscles to do complex movements. To keep body fit, children should be
exposed to outdoor activities also. These activities should be planned in such way that
there is focus on muscular aspect of movement for gross and fine motor skills
development.
I. Tick the correct options
1. An activity that is NOT an example of gross motor skills is
(a) drawing
(b) standing
(c) throwing a ball
(d) jumping
2. An activity that is NOT an example of fine motor skills is
(a) using cutlery
(b) riding a bike
(c) building a toy tower
(d) cutting shapes using scissors
II. Answer the following questions briefly
1. Define Motor Development.
2. Briefly describe the domains of motor development.
3. Describe any one factor that affects motor development.
4. List down the major factors affecting motor development.
III. Answer the following questions in 150-200 words
1. Explain factors affecting motor development.
[164]
5.2.1 Physical Activity Guidelines at Different Stages of Growth and
Development
World Health Organisation (WHO) has identified lack of physical activity, or physical
inactivity, as the fourth leading risk factor for global mortality (6% of deaths globally).
Regular participation in physical activities and sports provides ample opportunities to
maintain physical, mental and social health. Participation in sports and physical activity
results in benefits like an increase in self-confidence and self-esteem, a better control over
emotions, reduction in levels of stress, anxiety and depression, maintenance of healthy
weight social interaction and achieving high performance in academics. Regular physical
activities help in not just physical, but also social, emotional and mental growth and
development of infants, children, adolescents and adults. Physical activities should be
encouraged among children to ensure strong muscles and bones. Children and young
people should not be allowed to sit for long hours watching TV, playing computer games
and travelling by car.
WHO has developed certain guidelines – Global Recommendations on Physical Activity for
Health – with the overall aim of providing national and regional level policy makers with
guidance on the frequency, duration, intensity, type and total amount of physical activity
needed for the prevention of Non-Communicable Diseases or Lifestyle Diseases.
5.2.2 Children Under 5 Years of Age
“Achieving health for all means doing what is best for health right from the beginning of
people’s lives,” says WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. “Early
childhood is a period of rapid development and a time when family lifestyle patterns can be
adapted to boost health gains.” Children under five must spend less time sitting watching
screens, or restrained in prams and seats, get better quality sleep and have more time for
active play if they are to grow up healthy.
Picture Source1
[165]
The following guidelines are recommended for healthy children aged Under 5 years,
irrespective of gender, race, ethnicity, cultural background, and the socio-economic status
of the family.
These are also relevant for children with different abilities. Children with a medical
condition or disability should consult with health professionals before undertaking these
activities. The goals of these guidelines are to recommend time spent on physical activities,
and on sleep and sedentary activities to get health benefits. The age group further divided in
to three group namely Less than 1 year, 1 to 2 years, 3 to 4 years.
Age Sedentary Behaviour Physical Activity Sleep
Less than 1 year Not be restrained for Physically active 14–17hours (0–3
more than 1 hour at a several times a day months of age) or
time. Encourage reading through interactive 12– 16h (4–11
and storytelling when floor-based play months of age) of
sedentary. Screen time including 30 minutes good quality sleep,
is not recommended. of tummy time. including naps.
1-2 years Not restrained for more At least 180 minutes 11-14 hours of good
than 1 hour at a time or in a variety of types quality sleep,
sit for extended periods of physical activities including naps, with
of time. No screen time including moderate- regular sleep and
for 1-year-olds. For 2 to-vigorous-intensity wake-up times.
years, sedentary screen physical activity,
time should be no more spread throughout
than 1 hour. Encourage the day.
reading and storytelling.
3-4 years Not restrained for more At least 180 minutes 10–13h of good
than 1 hour at a time or in a variety of types quality sleep, which
sit for extended periods of physical activities may include a nap,
of time. Sedentary at any intensity, of with regular sleep
screen time should be which at least 60 and wake-up times.
no more than 1 hour; minutes is moderate-
less is better. Encourage to vigorous intensity
reading and storytelling. physical activity,
spread throughout
the day.
[166]
Infants (Less than 1 year)
Infants should be provided enough space and open environment to promote movement and
minimize restrictive or sedentary behaviour so that they may explore their surroundings.
Babies should be encouraged to be active throughout the day, every day. Before your baby
begins to crawl, encourage her/him to be physically active by reaching and grasping, pulling
and pushing, moving her/his head, body and limbs during daily routines, and during
supervised floor play. This includes giving the baby 30 minutes in prone position (tummy
time). Playing equipment should not be too small that can be swallowed or having sharp
edges or prepared with toxic material. Activities like crawling and rolling should be
performed on mat or sheet size of at least 7 feet by 4 feet. Once babies can move around,
encourage them to be as active as possible in a safe, supervised and nurturing play
environment. During sedentary timing child must be engaged in reading and storytelling for
encouragement. For 0-3 months ages 14-17 hours and for 4-11 months of age baby should
have good quality sleep that includes naps.
Toddlers (1-2 years of age)
During this period, the child should not be involved in any sedentary activity which is more
than one-hour long including being restrained in prams/strollers, high chairs, or strapped on
a caregiver’s back, or sitting for extended periods of time. Once they learn to sit and stand
toddlers should be encouraged to undertake fundamental physical activity like walking,
running, jumping, catching, throwing, leaping etc. In this group sedentary screen time like
involvement with computer games, watching TV or video is not recommended. Engagement
in reading and storytelling should not be more than one hour. It is recommended toddlers
get 11-14 hours of good quality sleep, including naps, with regular sleep and wake-up times.
Children 3–4 years
Children should spend at least 180 minutes in a variety of types of physical activities at any
intensity, of which at least one hour is spent in moderate to vigorous intensity physical
activity. This should be spread throughout the da y, indoors or outside. In the 180 minutes
of physical activity, we can include light activity such as standing up, moving around, rolling
and playing, as well as more energetic activities like skipping, hopping, running and jumping.
Active play, such as using a climbing frame, riding a bike, playing in water, chasing games
and ball games, is the best way for this age group to get moving. Sedentary time should not
be more than one hour, and during this period engagement in reading and storytelling
should be encouraged. Quality sleep between 10-13 hours is recommended which includes
a nap, with regular sleep and wake-up times.
[167]
All these recommendations are divided into three components Physical activity, sedentary
behaviour and sleep. Lesser sedentary time and more moderate to vigorous intensity
physical activity with sufficient sleep can provide additional health benefits.
5.2.3 Children and Youth 5-17 Years
These recommendations are relevant to healthy children and youth between 5 to 17 of age
irrespective of gender, race, ethnicity or socio-economic status.
Children and youth with a specific medical condition or disability may follow these
recommendations under advice of a medical official or with the help of the school special
education teacher. Activities should be done in a progressive manner, for example starting
the session with simple exercises to complex, gradually increasing the frequency, duration
and intensity of the activities. There are various stages of growth in this age group, wherein
at every stage the type of activities changes. The chief aim of activities during this age group
is to improve cardiorespiratory and muscular fitness, bone health, cardiovascular and
metabolic health biomarkers and to reduce symptoms of anxiety and depression.
Picture Source 2
Intensity Moderate to Vigorous.
Volume/ At least one hour in a day; more than 60 minutes will provide additional
Duration health benefits.
Frequency One session of 1 hour or two sessions of 30 minutes each.
Types of Aerobic, basic exercises for strengthening of muscles, Fundamental activities
Activities (Jumping, running, throwing, turning twisting etc.)
[168]
Benefits Regular exercise helps to develop Musculo-skeletal system (Bones, muscles
and joints), cardiovascular system (heart and lunges), neuromuscular system
(coordination, movement control, motor learning) and maintain health body
composition. Physical activities also help to develop psychological (control
over emotions, anxiety, depression, and manage stress) and sociological
aspects (interaction, integration, leadership), result in healthy behaviour
(avoidance of tobacco, alcohol, drugs) and promote academic performance.
Activities Play, Games, Sports, recreation, physical education, unplanned to planned
exercises with or within family, school and Community.
5.2.4 Adults 18-64 Years
These recommendations are relevant to healthy adults aged between 18 to 64 irrespective
of gender, race, ethnicity or social-economic status. Adults youth with disabilities may
follow these recommendations with adjustment as per capacity or limitations. Adult having
any medical condition should follow the advice of medical official. Activities should be done
in progressive manner for example to start session with simple exercises to complex,
gradually increase frequency, duration, intensity of the activities.
Intensity Moderate to Vigorous.
Types of Muscular strengthening (strength) and Aerobic physical activities
Activities
Aerobic 150 to 300 minutes per week with moderate intensity or 75 to 150 minutes
activities per week with vigorous intensity; One aerobic activity bout should be at
least 10 minutes
[169]
Muscle Activities involving major muscles involved activity, two or more days in a
strengthening week
activities
Benefits Regular physical activity helps to lower the risk of all causes of mortality,
(For example, Heart diseases, blood pressure, stroke, Type 2 diabetes,
metabolic syndrome, colon and breast cancers and depression) hip or
vertebral fractures, and to develop higher level of cardiorespiratory
muscular fitness and maintain healthy weight with healthy body
composition, bone health. It lowers the risk of Non-Communicable Diseases
and depression.
Activities Physical activities (walking jogging, swimming, weight training, dancing
etc.), occupational work, household work (car wash, gardening, etc.)
Games, Sports, recreation, transportation (walking, cycling), planned
exercises with or within family and community.
5.2.5 Older Adults 65 Years and Above
These recommendations are relevant to healthy older adults aged between 65 and above
irrespective of gender, race, ethnicity or social-economic status. These recommendations
are also relevant for individuals suffering from chronic NCD conditions Adults, youth with
disabilities may follow these recommendations with adjustment as per capacity or
limitations. Individuals with specific health conditions, such as cardiovascular disease and
diabetes, may need to take extra precautions and seek medical advice before trying to
achieve the recommended levels of physical activity for older adults. Activities should be
done in progressive manner for example to start session with simple exercises to complex,
gradually increasing frequency, duration and intensity of the activities as per their ability
and as conditions allow.
Picture Source 3
[170]
Intensity Moderate to Vigorous.
Types of Muscular strengthening (strength) and Aerobic physical activities and
Activities Balance-enhancing exercises.
Aerobic 150 to 300 minutes per week with moderate intensity or 75 to 150 minutes
activities per week with vigorous intensity; One aerobic activity bout should be at
least 10 minutes.
Muscle Activities involving major muscles involved activity, two or more days in a
strengthening week
activities
Balance- Older adults, with poor mobility, should perform physical activity to
enhancing enhance balance and prevent falls on 3 or more days per week.
Activities
Benefits Regular physical activity helps to lower the risk of all causes of mortality,
(For example, Heart diseases, blood pressure, stroke, Type 2 diabetes,
metabolic syndrome, colon and breast cancers and depression) hip or
vertebral fractures, and to develop higher level of cardiorespiratory
muscular fitness and maintain healthy weight with healthy body
composition, bone health. It lowers the risk of Non-Communicable
Diseases, depression and cognitive decline.
Activities Physical activities (walking jogging, swimming, weight training, dancing
etc.), occupational work, household work (car wash, gardening, etc.)
Games, Sports, recreation, transportation (walking, cycling), planned
exercises with or within family and community.
Do you Know?
Type of physical activity: includes aerobic, strength, flexibility, balance.
Duration: is the length of time in which an activity or exercise is performed. Duration is
generally expressed in minutes.
Frequency: is the number of times an exercise or activity is performed. Frequency is
generally expressed in sessions, episodes, or bouts per week.
Intensity: refers to the rate at which the activity is being performed or the magnitude of the
effort required to perform an activity or exercise.
Volume: Aerobic exercise exposures can be characterized by an interaction between bout
intensity, frequency, duration, and longevity of the programme. The product of these
characteristics can be thought of as volume.
[171]
Moderate-intensity physical activity: On an absolute scale, moderate intensity refers to
activity that is performed at 3.0–5.9 times the intensity of rest. On a scale relative to an
individual’s personal capacity, moderate-intensity physical activity is usually a 5 or 6 on a
scale of 0–10.
Vigorous-intensity physical activity: On an absolute scale, vigorous intensity refers to
activity that is performed at 6.0 or more times the intensity of rest for adults and typically
7.0 or more times for children and youth. On a scale relative to an individual’s personal
capacity, vigorous intensity physical activity is usually a 7 or 8 on a scale of 0–10.
Aerobic activity: also called endurance activity, improves cardiorespiratory fitness.
Examples of aerobic activity include: brisk walking, running, bicycling, jumping rope, and
swimming.
Sedentary behaviour: is characterized by a very low energy expenditure, such as sitting,
reclining or lying down
Sleep behaviour: Duration and timing of sleep. For children under 5 years of age includes
both at night and daytime naps. Toddler Child aged 1 to under 3 years (12.0–35.9 months).
Tummy time: Time an infant spends lying on her/his stomach (in prone position) while
awake with unrestricted movement of limbs.
Nap: Period of sleep, usually during the daytime in addition to usual night time sleep.
Reference: www.who.int
I. Tick the correct options
1. Minimum duration of activity should be _ per week at vigorous intensity in
adults above 65 years of age.
(a) 75 minutes
(b) 150 minutes
(c) 300 minutes
(d) 450 minutes
2. Rate at which the activity is being performed is known as _
(a) Volume
(b) Intensity
(c) Type of Activity
(d) Frequency
II. Answer the following questions briefly
1. Write down Physical activities exercise guideline for under 5 of age.
[172]
2. Briefly tell about physical activities exercises guideline for above 65 of age.
III. Answer the following questions in 150-200 words
1. Describe Physical activities exercise guideline for all groups.
5.3.1 Posture
Posture is defined as the attitude assumed by the body either with support during the
course of muscular activity, or as a result of the coordinated action performed by a group of
muscles working to maintain the stability. Posture is classified into two categories.
1. Dynamic posture is how one holds oneself when moving, For example, walking,
running, or bending over to pick up something. It is usually required to form an
efficient basis for movement. Muscles and non-contractile structures have to work to
adapt to changing circumstances.
2. Static posture is how one holds oneself when stationary or not moving, For example,
sitting, standing, or sleeping. Body segments are aligned and maintained in fixed
positions. This is usually achieved by co-ordination and interaction of various muscle
groups which are working statically to counteract gravity and other forces.
Extension Activity
Working in groups
 Distinguish between poor posture and proper posture.
 Describe proper posture while sitting, studying, writing, standing, walking.
 Discuss the significance of having a good posture.
Design a poster to be put up on the school Notice Board urging students to maintain good
posture. Highlight the ill effects of poor posture.
It is important to make sure to maintain a good posture. This is possible where all body parts
are aligned in such a way that least stress put on joints and muscles and, thus, it helps to
prevent fatigue. A good posture helps to give good productivity in work, and leads to a
physically and mentally stress-free condition. Postural deformity may be caused by heredity,
disease, injury, poor habits, improper clothing, unhygienic living conditions, improper diet,
improper exercises, lack of exercise, obesity, socio-economic status, etc.
[173]
5.3.2 Common Postural Deformities
There are a number of postural deformities, some of which are given below along with
corrective measures. Corrective exercises should be done under advice and supervision of a
physician or a physiotherapist.
Knock
Knees
Deformities
5.3.3 Knock Knees
Knock Knees, also known as Genu valgum, is a knee misalignment that turns the knees
inward. As a result, both knees touch or knock against each other in a normal standing
posture but there is a gap of 3-4 inches between the ankles. It is generally first noticed in
early childhood, but in most cases, it usually corrects itself naturally by the time children are
7-8 years old. However, in some cases it continues till adolescence. In some cases Genu
valgum can also develop due to an injury or infection in the knee or leg, rickets, severe lack
of vitamin D and calcium, obesity, or arthritis in the knee.
It negatively effects walking and running and impedes other legs movement which hinder
performance. In case Genu valgum persists beyond childhood, it may have other symptoms
besides misaligned knees. They include stiff joints, knee pain and walking with a limp.
Stressed ligaments and muscles can also cause pain in the hips, ankles, or feet. If only one
knee is out of line, the stance may be unbalanced.
[174]
Do you know?
The man who discovered genes was an Austrian Gregor Mendel. Mendel was a
scientist, Augustinian friar and abbot of St. Thomas' Abbey in Brno,
Margraviate of Moravia. Though farmers had known for millennia that
crossbreeding of animals and plants could favor certain desirable traits,
Mendel's pea plant experiments conducted between 1856 and 1863
established many of the rules of heredity, now referred to as the laws of Mendelian
inheritance.
Corrective Measures
Treatment for Genu valgum largely depends on the cause and severity of the problem.
Exercises like horse riding and keeping the pillow between the knees and standing erect for
some time are the best. For most people with Genu valgum, Yoga and exercise can help
realign and stabilize the knees. Performing padmasana and gomukhasana regularly can help
strengthen muscles of the legs and realign the knees. Strengthening exercises can be simple,
such as leg raises while seated or lying down. Using of walking callipers is also a big help at
pre-puberty stage.
Excessive body weight can be a contributing factor to Genu valgum as extra weight puts
additional strain on the legs and knees, and this can cause knock-knees to worsen. A person
who is overweight should lose weight through a combination of diet and exercise.
5.3.4 Flat Foot
Flat foot is also known as pes planus or fallen arches. It is a condition that may be diagnosed
by looking at the arch of the foot or by taking the water print test. As the name flat foot
suggests, people suffering from this deformity have either no arch in their feet, or one that
is very low, allowing the entire soles of the feet to touch the floor in standing position.
[175]
This problem may be genetic or environmental. At times a foot or ankle injury due to
obesity, injury, wearing improper shoes (tight shoes, high heels etc.), carrying heavy weight
for long time, arthritis or rheumatoid arthritis. It may be caused by a baby being forced to
walk in an early stage, or it may be age related. Another condition that might cause flat feet
is tarsal coalition.
This condition causes the bones of the foot to fuse together unusually, resulting in stiff and
flat feet. Tightness in calf muscles may lead to temporary flat feet.
Arches provide a spring to the step and help to distribute body weight across the feet and
legs. The structure of the arches determines how a person walks. Arches need to be both
sturdy and flexible to adapt to stress and a variety of surfaces. When people have flat feet, it
affects their posture while standing, their walking, running, and other related performances.
Flatfeet can sometimes contribute to problems in the ankles and knees. Majority of babies
are born with flat feet but as they grow or get involved in physical activities the arch in the
foot develops.
Corrective Measures
Exercises like walking, standing or jumping on toes and heels in all four directions, skipping
rope, strengthens the muscles of foot which help to develop the arch in the foot. Activities
like picking up marbles with toes, writing numbers in the sand with the toes will also help in
developing the arch. Yoga asanas like Adhomukhsavasana performed in Surya Namaskar,
Vajrasana and other therapeutic massages are also helpful in developing the arch.
5.3.5 Round Shoulders
Round shoulders is a postural deformity in which shoulders are bent forward from the ideal
alignment, thereby giving a narrow curve to upper back. It leads to postural deviations such
as hyperkyphosis, or hunch back and anterior head carriage, or forward head posture. Over
time, these postural conditions can progress and lead to other conditions such as chronic
neck pain, thoracic outlet syndrome and lack of shoulder mobility.
[176]
It may occur at any age due to poor posture habits, heredity, muscle imbalance, tight fitting
clothes, injury, disease etc. Poor posture habits include using smartphone, tablet, computer,
driving, carrying heavy weights and sitting for long periods.
Corrective Measures
Most important measure to correct rounded shoulders is strengthening and stretching of
muscles and trying to correct the imbalance of muscles by doing chest stretches, T stretch,
wall stretch, Handclasp stretch and planks, pull ups, reverse shoulder stretch, etc.
Developing the habit of keeping the spine straight is also helpful in correcting rounded
shoulders. Yoga asanas like Chakrasana, Dhanurasana, can be useful in correcting rounded
shoulders.
5.3.6 Kyphosis
Kyphosis is also known as Hunch Back or round upper back. The word Kyphosis comes from
the Greek term kyph and means bent or bowed. It is a condition of the spine where the
curvature of the upper back gets exaggerated or increases. It is an exaggerated, forward
rounding of the back. Kyphosis can occur due to heredity, aging, disease (arthritis,
osteoporosis), malnutrition, pulling of heavy weight over a period, unstable furniture, poor
postural habit, weakness in muscles etc. It can occur at any age but is most common in older
women. Age-related kyphosis is often due to weakness in the spinal bones that causes them
to compress or crack. Kyphosis can appear in infants or teens due to malformation of the
spine or wedging of the spinal bones over time.
[177]
While mild Kyphosis causes few problems, severe Kyphosis can cause pain and be
disfiguring. This posture creates instability while walking, running etc. that may lead to fall
or injury.
Corrective Measures
Exercises which help to strengthen back muscles, provide stability and make muscles more
flexible should be performed. Physical therapy, swimming, exercise/ gym ball exercises,
exercises with bands, and Yoga asanas like Dhanurasana, Chakrasana and Bhujangasana
should be performed to get optimum benefits. Using a flat bed with a thin pillow while
sleeping.
5.3.7 Lordosis
The term Lordosis comes from the Greek lordos which means bent backward. The spine
curves a little in the neck, upper back, and lower back. These curves, which create the
spine’s S shape, are called the kyphotic (upper back) and lordotic (neck and lower back).
Lordosis is a spinal deformity in which the angle of arc of the lower back is reduced. This
leads to an increase and exaggeration of normal concavity of the lumber region of the spine.
It is also known as sway back. Chronic Lordosis may lead to pain and discomfort and become
more serious if left untreated.
[178]
Lordosis is often caused by obesity, improper development of muscles, muscular or skeletal
disease or accident, poor posture while standing, sitting and walking, malnutrition, etc.
There are few cases where the cause was unknown. It is generally found in children because
of weakening or tightening of muscles of the hip area, but they easily recover as they grow
and muscles get strengthened.
Corrective Measures
Most people with Lordosis don’t require medical treatment unless it’s a severe case. In
severe cases of Lordosis in children and teens may require use of braces, or even surgery.
Largely, weight loss, to help posture and daily physical therapy, to strengthen muscles and
range of motion prove quite helpful. Exercises to develop strength in the pelvic region like
sit-ups, sitting against the wall and pushing the trunk backward and lying on the back and
raising upper extremities and legs together will give significant benefits. Yoga asanas
including Dhanurasana and Halasana will be helpful. Use of braces, weight reduction,
maintaining a good posture and taking a balanced diet are helpful in reducing the problem.
5.3.8 Scoliosis
The word Scoliosis comes from the Greek skolios which means bent. Scoliosis is a position in
which the spine is tilted to either side of the body. It is a position of exaggerated lateral
[179]
curvature or sideways curvature of the. In this disorder, the spine bends, twists or rotates in
a way that it makes a C or an S shape. Scoliosis is found more commonly in girls than in boys
and, though it can occur at any age, but it is more common during the growth spurt just
before puberty. Most cases of scoliosis are mild, but some spinal deformities continue to get
more severe as children grow. Severe scoliosis can be disabling. An especially severe spinal
curve can reduce the amount of space within the chest, making it difficult for the lungs to
function properly.
Scoliosis can be caused by conditions such as cerebral palsy and muscular dystrophy, or
diseases like Arthritis, Paralysis, Rickets. It may result from lifting heavy weights, living in an
unhealthy environment, and standing and sitting in a wrong posture. However, the cause of
most scoliosis is unknown.
Corrective Measures
In cases of mild Scoliosis, no treatment is necessary. Some children may need to wear a
brace to stop the curve from worsening. Others may need surgery to keep the problem from
worsening and to straighten the spine. Exercises like hanging on the horizontal bars and
swinging should be done on opposite side of the C-shaped curve. Aerobic activities with
slow pace and breaststroke in swimming are helpful and also give good results. In yoga
Trikonasana and Adhomukhasana should be performed to straighten the spine.
[180]
5.3.9 Bow Legs
Bow Legs, also known as Genu varum, is a position of knees in which legs look like a bow,
when the legs curve outward at the knees while the feet and ankles touch. Infants and
toddlers often have bow legs. It may be caused due to lack of Vitamin D, Phosphorus and
Calcium and can be easily cured at an early stage. The condition doesn't cause pain or
discomfort and is rarely serious. It does not affect running, standing, crawling etc. Bow legs
is a condition that usually goes away without treatment, often by the time a child is 3–4
years old and does not affect a child's ability to crawl, walk, or run. However, parents might
worry about the appearance of their child's legs, or an awkward walking pattern.
Sometimes, kids with bow legs may walk with the toes pointed inward, called pigeon-toes,
or they may trip a lot and appear clumsy. Although in most cases the problem generally gets
resolved on its own as the child grows, sometimes, it may lead to arthritis in the knees and
hips. At times Bowlegs can be a sign of an underlying disease, such as Blount’s disease,
rickets, or arthritis.
Corrective Measures
Use of braces and modified shoes can be along with sufficient intake of balanced diet can
prove to be of help. Walking on the inner edge of the feet may also help.
I. Tick the correct options
1. Deformity of the legs is known as
(a) Scoliosis
(b) Lordosis
(c) Knock knees
[181]
(d) Kyphosis
2. Lordosis is a problem of the
(a) Lower Back
(b) Middle Back
(c) Upper Back
(d) Shoulders
3. Scoliosis is a postural deformity related to
(a) Muscles
(b) Shoulders
(c) Legs
(d) Spine
4. Kyphosis is a deformity found in
(a) Shoulders
(b) Lumber region
(c) Hips
(d) Thoracic region
II. Answer the following questions briefly
1. What is meant by Round Shoulders? Mention a few exercises to correct it.
2. What is the Lordosis? Write in brief.
3. Write in brief the causes and symptoms of Knock Knees.
4. Explain corrective measures for Flatfoot.
III. Answer the following questions in 150-200 words
1. Explain any five postural deformities with their corrective measures.
2. Describe corrective measures of some common spinal postural deformities.
5.4.1 Participation of Women in Sports in India
Women's sports, both amateur and professional, have existed throughout the world for
centuries in all varieties of sports. There is a rich record of sports participation of women in
India. In the days of Mahabharata, Shakuntala, Madhuri, Kunti all choose physical activities
as recreation. As time passed, India women were deprived of participation in sports for a
number of reasons, despite having potential and talent. They were put on the back seat, and
were not allowed to participate in sports. However, female participation and popularity in
[182]
sports increased dramatically in the last quarter of the 20th century, reflecting changes that
emphasize gender parity. Although the level of participation and performance can still be
improved, women's participation in sports is generally accepted and promoted today.
Although women have shown a dramatic rise in sports participation, there is still a large
disparity in participation rates between women and men remains. These disparities
continue to hinder equality in sports. Many institutions and programmes still remain
conservative and do not contribute to gender equity in sports. Some research in physical
domain lists constraints like heavy limbs, pear-shaped body structure and postural
deformities like flat foot knock knees etc., and physiological constraints including low level
of RBCs, smaller heart and lungs, high fat percentage, menstrual disorders etc as reasons for
women’s non-participation in sports. There are certain psychological constraints like low
self-confidence and self-esteem, higher levels of stress and anxiety and social causes like
lack of support or positive reinforcement from family and a male-dominated social structure
that affect women’s participation in Sports. Religious and economic factors also play a
negative role that affects women’s participation in sports.
However, these constraints are now being reduced or eliminated as more women athletes
are participating in sports. Regular physical activities and sports help to manage weight,
tone the muscles, lower blood pressure, improve blood flow, increase high density
lipoprotein and lower low density lipoprotein levels. Increased physical activity lowers the
risk of heart and lungs disease and increases heart and lung capacity. Sports is an important
[183]
tool for social empowerment and helps to develop skills like communication, teamwork,
leadership, respect, social interaction, sportsmanship etc. and can significantly contribute to
develop society and community. Sports participation not only provide health benefits but
give overall development. Sport does not discriminate on the basis of colour, cast, creed,
sex, race etc.
This trend of lower participation of women in sports exists not just in India, but is a global
phenomenon. Participation of women at all levels from regional to international is limited. It
affects all domains like participation in sports activities, administration of associations and
federations, and participation in national and international level committees. Women who
play sports continue to face many obstacles, such as lower pay, less media coverage, and
different injuries compared to their male counterparts. Many female athletes have engaged
in peaceful protests, such as playing strikes, social media campaigns, and even lawsuits to
address these inequalities.
Do you know?
Some Indian women sportspersons who won medals in international events in 2019.
1. Dutee Chand - First Indian to win a 100m gold in a global event at the 30th Summer
University Games in Napoli, Italy.
2. Hima Das - Won 5 gold medals in 20 days
 July 2, Poznan: 200m gold (23.65 seconds)
 July 7, Kunto: 200m gold (23.97 seconds)
 July 13, Kladno: 200m gold (23.43 seconds)
 July 17, Tabor: 200m gold (23.25 seconds)
 July 20, Prague: 400m gold (52.09 seconds)
3. PV Sindhu - First Indian to win World Championships
 2013 - Bronze
 2014 - Bronze
 2017 - Silver
 2018 - Silver
 2019 – Gold
4. Manasi Joshi - Won BWF Para-Badminton World Championship
Para-badminton player Manasi Joshi created history by securing gold at the BWF Para-
Badminton World Championships, just a day before Sindhu.
5. PU Chitra - Clinched gold in women's 1500m race
Won the Gold at the Asian Athletics Championship 2019 in Doha.
[184]
The International Olympic Committee (IOC) encourages participation not only in playing
sports but in National Olympic Committees and International Federations and conducting
regional seminars for female administrators, coaches, technical officials and journalists. In a
recent announcement by IOC, 49% women will take part in next Olympic games. The
constitution of India also provides gender equality and ensures to eliminate any type of
hindrance. Sports is a medium to get gender equity and empowerment.
5.4.2 Constraints for Women's Participation in Sports in India
Physical Constraints - Physical constraints refer to the morphological feature adaptations to
particular sports. Basically, it refers to the qualities of the sports person such as the physical
fitness parameters. If there is failure in any of these required parameters it results in the
reduction of sports performance. To mention a few: heavy musculature of limbs, pelvic or
abdomen, improper posture/ postural deformity or flat foot.
Physiological Constraints -Physiological constraints refer to the organ functions ultimately
impacting the system coordination. If there is any dysfunction of the organs it results in
reduction of sports performance. Some women have lower levels of RBCs, lower percentage
of Haemoglobin, smaller or weaker heart and it circulation, smaller or weaker lungs and
breathing mechanism, dysfunction of organs of endocrine system, greater body fat
percentage, dominance of neither aerobic power nor anaerobic power , Menstrual
disorders.
Psychological Constraints - Psychological constraints comprise the behavioural process such
as higher level of anxiety or aggression, lack of self- confidence, achievement motivation or
interest, lower self-esteem or hesitation to participate during menstrual periods. These
factors result in the reduction of wilful participation in sports.
Social Constraints - Social constraints refer to the behaviour of society in general and sports
field in particular. During training and competition, the relationship with coaches, arena
persons, training-mates, co-participants, opponents and officials during competition affects
not just performance, but also participation. If there is any undue harassment or
misbehaviour during this period, it results in reduction in sports performance or ultimately
exit from sports participation. Lack of parental support and encouragement, and male
dominant social structure also has a very negative impact on participation.
Religious Constraints - Religious constraints prevail in those societies who are
fundamentalist and have rigid religious beliefs. They fear as society may ostracise them for
going beyond the boundaries of their religion. This might also be the cause of limited
participation in sports by women in India.
[185]
